SUPPORTING INFORMATIONPOST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH AMN1English translation (original transcript in Spanish below)I: So, first I’m going to share the screen. Let’s see… is it being shared?AMN1: (Nods.)I: Okay. Ah… wait, I want to make it a little bigger for you.AMN1: Ah, yes… I remember now.I: Yes. Okay, these were like the most common types of feedback that are usually used in language teaching, and I’m going to show you what answers you gave at the time, and I’m also going to ask you if these are types of feedback that you have seen throughout your history learning languages, or that you have been taught, right? Because now you said that you were studying to be a teacher, so…AMN1: Yes.I: This is like the most basic one, which is to directly give the solution, without any other context, and you said that it seemed pretty clear to you, but not very useful. Do you still think that way?AMN1: Okay, let me read for a minute…I: Okay.AMN1: Okay. Well, yes. It’s pretty clear. I don’t know why I didn’t choose “very clear,” but it all seems pretty clear.I: There is a comment.AMN1: Oh, okay.I: If it helps.AMN1: Yes, well, maybe it would be necessary to write more about grammar, perhaps, to make the error clearer. Because, for example, vocabulary is suggested here, but in some cases it may be a deeper error, which has to do with a lack of knowledge about grammar or…I: And are you familiar with this type of feedback?AMN1: Yes, I mean… In fact, today I had to review the first test that I did with my students… I mean, today, on this very same day, I learned the symbols to indicate grammatical errors, spelling errors, etc., and in many cases we don’t even write like… the correct word. We only write “VOC” for vocabulary errors, and I don’t like that. I prefer to make it clearer, and write the correct word or a suggestion, but, if you have to correct like… a lot… I don’t know, 40 or 50 exams, maybe you don’t have the time and you prefer to do it like this.I: And then do you ask students to hand in a corrected version, when you correct this way?AMN1: Yes.I: (Nods.) The second type of feedback is like… the one we would all like to be able to give.AMN1: (Nods and smiles.)I: But, as you said, with 40 exams it is not very viable, because… At the time, you said, of course, that it seemed very clear to you and that it was very useful, and that in this manner… Well, your comment is very optimistic… that with this version the person can understand and integrate the vocabulary that has been corrected. I understand then that you still think like this.AMN1: (Nods.)I: This is a less common type of feedback, which only indicates that there are errors, but does not say where or which ones. And you did not like this one at all: you said that it was not at all clear and that it was… it could be a little useful, but mainly… more than anything suggestive and useless.AMN1: OK, I think it is a little paradoxical, because that would be useful for a very advanced person, but a very advanced person wouldn’t make so many mistakes, perhaps. So, I don’t know, it is not useful perhaps.I: This consists simply of locating the error without correcting it, and it seemed relatively clear to you, but not useful at all. And you said something similar: that if the student has a good level, it can be useful, but, if not, well… more knowledge is needed.AMN1: OK, yes.I: This is the type that you just described to me. Instead of “LEX,” you may use other categories.AMN1: Yes.I: This type of correction is actually quite popular, and you already stated what you just said, that you didn’t like it very much, because it doesn’t seem as clear to you, and also... well, as a consequence of its lack of clarity, you don’t see it as useful.AMN1: Yes, I mean... For the majority of my students, who are 15 years old, they don’t have much experience with... well, they also learn English, but, yes, they are younger and they don’t think about it much, I would say... and, therefore, that might be too little... Above all, I think that the majority don’t even review feedback much and, if they only look at it and see “GRA,” “VOC,” “LEX,” whatever, maybe they don’t feel like... yes, reflecting more, or correcting, or thinking.I: And don’t teachers spend time familiarizing the student with these categories before using them?AMN1: Maybe so. I have two classes of 15-year-olds. This school accepts students from the age of 13, so I think they do when they enter school, in high school, but… Yeah, I don’t know, but I guess they do.I: Because you told me that students are asked to correct their essays; so, in this process, they should learn to use these categories, but it’s not your experience that it’s like that.AMN1: Yes, I mean, in this school they do ask them to revise everything, but I remember that in my school it wasn’t always necessary to do it. Some teachers asked for it and others didn’t, so… And they used other symbols and other abbreviations, that’s why too…I: Now… Thank you for mentioning this, because I realize that I forgot to ask you if you’re familiar with this type of correction, the one that gives the comment.AMN1: Well, this one seems to me, yes…I: Sorry, it’s… You’ve received it throughout your career as a student.AMN1: Not like that, I mean, this part of the exam, or the exercise… It’s like a part, yes, of grammar. Normally, for text production, they do give you… they write you a very long text about your mistakes and what to improve, and your expression and everything, but in the grammar part it’s usually just a symbol and nothing else.I: (Nods.) They’ve never used this one with you, right?AMN1: No, I don’t think so.I: This one?AMN1: (Thinks.)I: It’s just underlining.AMN1: (Thinks.) I think they used to use a symbol, at least, yes.I: Okay, you already said yes to the symbol. Okay, this type is through indirect questions or clues and also indicating where the error is. And you found it clear and relatively useful. You mentioned again the issue that it would be necessary to have some metalinguistic knowledge to be able to solve it, but okay.AMN1: Yes. Older students, with more experience, yes. That would be useful, but... Well, in my case, with the 15-year-olds, I think not. But at university it’s quite useful, I think, yes.I: And have you experienced it?AMN1: I don’t think so. No.I: And this is the last type, which consists in reformulating an entire fragment written by the student and providing them with a model of use while maintaining the original message. You said that this type seemed a bit clear to you, but it was not useful, because you cannot see where the errors are at first glance.AMN1: Yes.I: And have you...?AMN1: (Reads.)I: Oh, sorry, I’ll let you read.AMN1: No, no. Yes, okay. Okay, yes. It is unclear and I do not find it very useful. I mean, if students have to look everything up themselves and if they weren’t already feeling like working on a revision, that also makes it harder.I: And have you experienced it? Has any teacher corrected you in this way?AMN1: No, never. They always marked the mistakes.I: OK. Well, this was a bit to remind you of the types of feedback I’m working with. So, now I’m going to tell you a bit about what I’ve seen in the analysis to ask you about some specific mistakes. Let’s see, in general, well, I’ve only looked at lexical mistakes. Although, as I’ve also looked at the combination of words, sometimes there are also some errors with prepositions and determiners, but it’s always in relation to a fixed expression.AMN1: (Nods.)I: So, most of your mistakes have to do with substitutions, which means using a word that exists in Spanish, but that doesn’t work in the context in which you’ve used it.AMN1: (Nods.)I: Problems with prepositions, which is normal, because prepositions are the most difficult to acquire. And then there are problems with determiners. And of course, out of these errors that you’ve made, since the essays are not versions of the same text, only some of them appear again in other essays, because that depends on what vocabulary you use depending on the topic. But among those that I have been able to detect, you’ve also corrected most of the substitutions, prepositions and articles. So, out of those that I’ve detected, I’ve looked at those that you’ve corrected well, those that you seem to have tried to rectify, but it hasn’t worked well in the new context, and other errors that have been repeated, that is, like... the feedback hasn’t worked. When we look at this… I am not judging you, I just want to see what worked and what didn’t work, but obviously… I mean, I want to make it clear that you are a very good student and that this is not a value judgment.AMN1: Well, of course, I understand.I: Okay, so, let’s see, this is where we’ll start going through a lot of documents, and I ask for your patience.AMN1: (Nods.)I: Well, according to your preferences, the best type of feedback is the one that includes the comment, and you don’t like… I mean, actually the two types of feedback that seem to have had an effect in the sense that you have applied them in later writings, are the one that includes a comment and the one that gives the solution directly without comment. So, it seems that your preferences fit what works for you. So, out of the two types of feedback, the one that seems to have been most useful to you is the one that doesn’t give you any metalinguistic comment, but at the same time it is normal because it’s much more frequent. I didn’t spend time adding comments all the time, also because of a time issue. So, since the one you like the most is the metalinguistic one, that is, the one that includes the comment, let’s look at the two examples where it did appear… Well, where it may seem that there’s an application of the feedback, although now, when we review it, you might tell me that it was pure coincidence, which can also happen... An error in number and order. Wait a minute. I wanted to look at the… Okay, let’s start with this first and then I’ll look at the substitution errors, which were the most frequent ones you made. Let’s see, this was in the second writing task. Okay, this was… Applied well… Well, I really think that in this case… I’ll show it to you anyway, but I think that the mistake you made was not really because you didn’t have this knowledge, but because sometimes, when the sentence is very long, if you don’t read it, you forget what the antecedent is and the number doesn’t fit because of that. Which was here: “Por eso los recuerdos escasos de la Tierra que han mantenido en su mente no les pudo proporcionar…” (That’s why the few memories from Earth that they kept in their minds could not provide them…). You confirm this, right?AMN1: (Reads.)I: It’s here, sorry. (Selects it.)AMN1: Okay, okay. And what error are you referring to?I: This one here. (Points to it.)AMN1: “No les pudo proporcionar la anhelada distracción” (could not provide them with the longed-for distraction.) Okay, yes, of course, “recuerdos”… “pudieron.” Okay, yes.I: Okay, so the other one we have with a metalinguistic comment is… okay, in “verdadera.” Here it is. Okay, here I did write a more elaborate comment, which was the order of this sentence: “Sin embargo, la razón verdadera por la que bla, bla, bla.” The “verdadera” would have to go before, because if it goes after, it means something else. I’ll make it bigger so you can read the comment. Here. Well, I’ll let you read the comment, although it’s not too relevant, just in case you can remember something.AMN1: With English, yes, with English it was pretty clear afterwards, yes, that helped.I: And then here you wrote it in the correct order. And my question, which you probably can’t remember, but… was this a coincidence or was it that the feedback worked?AMN1: The feedback worked, yes, surely, in this case it worked.I: Okay, that’s all regarding types of feedback. And so, in terms of error types, I’m interested in the substitution type, which in your case mostly revolves around the distinction between “ser” and “estar.” Let’s look at the first one, which would be this one: “el miedo…” Here it is. Okay, you wrote… I’ll make it bigger for you. Well, this is excessively big. Here. You wrote: “el miedo es muy presente,” instead of “está muy presente.” And then, in other cases… Normally you used it well, but here we have “la cumbre era cubierta,” as a repeated error. And then you have two correct uses with “estaban colgadas” and “estar ocupados.”AMN1: (Nods.)I: Okay, and this is… I mean, my question here is: with “ser” and “estar”, did you work consciously with the feedback, or were you just experimenting? Because I remember that you said once about the past tense... like it’s impossible to understand it. And so... like you’re doing it randomly, or not randomly, but what sounds good to you, without thinking about it too much. In this case, would you say it’s the same?AMN1: It’s similar. I mean, in the case of tenses there are some clues that help you understand them, but in the end it’s a cultural understanding of time. And if in another language we understand time differently, or we don’t even make this distinction... In German, I would say that the distinction between the imperfect past tense and the indefinite past tense doesn’t play a very big role. So, yes, it’s difficult for me, and in the end, if you speak more quickly, you tend to do it more spontaneously. In the case of “ser” and “estar,” of course, I also have my rules and my ideas about this and what I’ve learned, but, in this case, why did I write “era cubierto” and not “estaba”...?I: I mean, I’m not asking you why you did it, because obviously you didn’t do it on purpose, but do you think you were using the feedback on “ser” and “estar” when writing, or did you do it on your own?AMN1: Did I write “era cubierto” first and then “estaba”?I: First you wrote “es muy presente,” “el miedo es muy presente”. Then you wrote “la cumbre era cubierta.” And then… Well, within the same writing task you also wrote “estaban colgadas,” which is correct, and then, in the fourth writing task, “estar ocupados.” I mean, I’m only looking at “ser” and “estar” with adjectives.AMN1: OK.I: I corrected all of this by just crossing out the verb and writing the correct one on top, that is, I didn’t give you any explanation. Although I conducted a lesson on “ser” and “estar,” but it’s not something that is learned in a single class.AMN1: Yes, maybe, yes. I don’t know if it was very conscious in the end, but I think maybe when I saw that using “ser” with adjectives is usually incorrect, I might have changed my strategy and used “estar” more afterwards. So maybe the feedback did have an impact, but I don’t consciously remember reviewing it.I: If you think you didn’t, don’t feel bad saying it. I’m interested in knowing, I mean… You don’t have to say yes, if you think you didn’t. I’m not going to be offended because you didn’t use the feedback, this is what I mean.AMN1: Okay. (Laughs.) Well, I mean, understanding the pre- or postposition of adjectives, as in the case of “verdadero,” is very easy; you see the examples in English, grasp the concept, apply it, and that’s it. However, in the case of the distinction between “ser” and “estar,” there are hundreds of contexts, and you never know. I mean, it’s like...I: Yes, yes.AMN1: It’s more challenging.I: OK, and the substitution error that interests me the most is “dentro de.”AMN1: Oh, yes, that’s hard for me. (Laughs.) Yes.I: Let’s see, this one happened later, the first one you made... Here. Yes, this mistake interests me a lot, because first you used it incorrectly in APN’s video, then you used it incorrectly in this writing task, and I corrected it by just crossing it out and writing “en cuestión de.” So, in the second writing task, wait... Yes, in the second... In the second writing task you got it right, I mean, you wrote “en cuestión de.” Then, in the fourth one, you used “dentro de” again. On that occasion, I corrected it by explaining it with a comment, and then in the final exam, you got “en cuestión de” right again. So, my question is, does this mistake sound familiar to you? And why do you think feedback works or doesn’t work in this case?AMN1: (Laughs.)I: I mean, the distinction between “dentro de” and “en cuestión de,” in terms of time, is that “dentro de” only works in the present. So, if I’m talking now, I can talk about what will happen within a certain amount of time, but if I use it in the past, I can’t say “dentro de diez minutos ya llegó alguien” (within ten minutes, someone had already arrived). I have to say “después de diez minutos” or “en cuestión de diez minutos, llegó esta persona.”AMN1: Okay. And did you explain it to me like that or did you just mark it as an error and…?I: That’s what I was going to tell you. In the first writing task where I saw that you got it wrong, I just crossed it out and wrote “en cuestión de.”AMN1: Okay.I: So, in the second writing task, you wrote “en cuestión de” instead of “dentro de.” So, it seemed like you had fixed the mistake. But then, in the fourth one, you wrote “dentro de” again, and I did correct it with a comment. I can show it to you... Let’s see, here. Oh… Why is it getting smaller? Isn’t this the ‘zoom in’ option? Here. I wrote this comment, where I briefly explained what I just told you about the present, and then in the final exam you got it right again.AMN1: (Nods and reads the comment.) Okay, hmm… Why did I make the mistake again and then stop? That’s the question. Well…I: You fixed it twice.AMN1: Yes. I mean, the explanation seems very clear to me, it’s easy to understand and maybe I paid more attention in the exam. I mean, it requires more concentration, more attention and... In this task or exercise that we did, maybe, I don’t know. Yes.I: But when you applied the first “en cuestión de” correctly, which was in the second writing task, and my only feedback had been to cross it out… You wrote “dentro de unos segundos” and I simply crossed it out and wrote this. (Shows it.)AMN1: Yes.I: You, in the second writing task, wrote “en cuestión de.” Here.AMN1: (Nods.)I: So first you fixed it and then you repeated it. I corrected it again and you did well on the final exam. But no... I mean, I guess from the fact that this mistake doesn’t sound familiar to you, that in reality this whole thing was a coincidence.AMN1: It might have been a mistake like... A mistake that I got used to making, and when you first corrected it, I rectified it, but if I didn’t repeat it much, I may have forgotten. In the exam, perhaps I paid more attention again, and maybe... I don’t know if I had reviewed all the feedback before the final exam... I don’t think so, but maybe that helped me do well in the end.I: I just explained the error, and you understand it now. But before that, had the feedback stuck with you?AMN1: Not in this case, no.I: I would say that’s all for substitution... Ah, well I’m interested in this one: the “ni,” which is in the second writing task. (Looks for it.) Hmm... Oh, it doesn’t detect spaces, let’s see where it might be. I think it was near the beginning. Here, yes. “Además, ni el peso corporal de los taikonautas se parecía al de la Tierra” (moreover, not even the taikonauts’ weight was similar to that on Earth). I didn’t catch this use of “ni”... Let’s see? One second, let’s see if I have it in another writing task. Okay, but this seems applied correctly... Okay, no, you didn’t make the mistake again here, but this is an error I remember you made on another occasion, but it’s possible it wasn’t in an essay, but rather that it just sounds familiar, like you might have said it once in class or on an exam. Which is this usage... Let’s see: “Además, ni el peso corporal de los taikonautas se parecía al de la Tierra.” If you look at this sentence now, do you understand why this “ni” is incorrect?AMN1: Yeah, I mean... One question, would “ni siquiera” be correct?I: Yes.AMN1: Okay, well, that’s the mistake. I mean, I didn’t write “siquiera” after it, I don’t know why. I mean, I don’t know, maybe I was in a hurry and I didn’t…I: It seems to me that it’s like a direct translation from English, like “nor”.AMN1: Mmm… Ah, okay. (Nods.) Well, in German… in German it’s similar to Spanish, it would also be two words: “ni siquiera”, “nicht einmal”. So in German it would be the same as in Spanish. Yeah, I’m surprised that I made that mistake.I: Well, it happens sometimes. It’s just that we use different parts of the brain to speak foreign languages.AMN1: (Nods.)I: Okay, I would say that with regard to this… Ah, yes, I’m interested in those errors where it seemed like you tried to apply some feedback instance, but it wasn’t successful. And the mistakes you repeated, although some of them we’ve already seen... The “dentro de” one we have seen. Okay, I’m interested in deixis errors. This one... “prohibir y abolir.” Let’s see. Sorry it’s a bit heavy, but…AMN1: No, that’s fine.I: Okay, here. You repeated this mistake twice and you rectified it correctly once. And here I get the impression that it’s as in “ser” and “estar,” something you also do by intuition: the distinction between “este” and “ese.”AMN1: (Reads.) Mmm. So “estos” is correct and “esos” is incorrect.I: The other way around.AMN1: The other way around. Ah, okay, the other way around. I wrote...I: You wrote “estos” and it should be “esos.”AMN1: Okay.I: And here too. You wrote “estos desgraciados” and “esta especie,” and it should be “esos desgraciados” and “esa especie.”AMN1: (Nods.)I: But here you wrote it right: “qué significaría...?” Well, the “significaría” would be incorrect, but it’s a grammatical error that I’m not focusing on. The “eso” would be correct. And I have corrected all this without comments.AMN1: Okay, I mean, you just... crossed it out and... okay. Ugh... (Laughs.) I think it was a coincidence. I mean, no... yes. I mean, now I don’t understand why I did it or...I: (Nods.)AMN1: I don’t even understand the rule why. No... No, yes, I don’t know.I: I mean, do you think it’s something you haven’t yet acquired?AMN1: I mean, it’s not clear to me why it doesn’t work well, so no. No.I: Let’s see... Of course, because when you look at the sentence by itself, isolated, it’s grammatically correct. So that’s why it’s not clear to you. Let’s see, this... In the fourth writing task. Ah, look, in this specific instance, I did leave a comment. Here. I explained that they are already gone. I mean, because in your essay, you ask people to leave. So, once they’ve left, you’re talking to the reader who stayed and you say... “Qué alivio que estos desgraciados se hayan marchado” (what a relief that these scoundrels have gone). You said “estos,” but it has to be “esos” because they’re no longer here, since they’ve left. So, they’re far away.AMN1: OK. (Nods.)I: So it is a difference that you understand.AMN1: Yes, I mean, it depends on their presence, whether they are there or not. Yes… Well, now I understand it, yes. Well, also... yes. Yes. It’s very clear, yes.I: Yes. Do you think you saw it clearly at the time when you read this comment: “ya no están” (they’re no longer here)?AMN1: Yes, I mean... Yes, without a doubt, it’s very clear, yes.I: Okay, I think this is enough regarding your specific errors, because this... Yes, preposition and determination errors, no matter how... I mean, it’s the same story, it’s somewhat done by intuition. So, okay, according to what you said in the questionnaire, which was here... Okay, you said, which is also why I was interested in interviewing you, that... I mean, from your answers, it seemed that you don’t find feedback to be that important. This isn’t a judgment, I repeat. (Laughs.) But, I mean, you said that you do think it’s important to get your corrected assignments back, but not very important. And then you said that, in general, you don’t usually seek additional information about the mistakes you’re given, I mean, the ones you make that are pointed out. You also said that if you don’t understand a comment, you don’t give it much importance, and that feedback hasn’t really helped you learn much. So, I don’t know if you still feel that way, but if you do, could you explain your opinion a bit more?AMN1: Okay, so, about reading the feedback and reviewing mistakes… I mean, before I finished school, I did start reading feedback a lot and… yes, to get better grades, and I did reflect a lot. But before that, I mean, most of my time in school, I didn’t read the feedback I got. So, yes, later on, it became more important to me. In university, yes, I do read it and I find it useful, so why did I say…? It’s just that I like to learn languages ??with content, I mean, I listen to music, read texts, write texts, and I also like to receive corrections, but it’s more like… I like it as… Yes, positive contact with the language. And about reviewing mistakes, that’s important, but… Yes, my way of learning is more indirect. I listen to the correct form and try to imitate it, and if I make a mistake, well, it has to be reviewed, but it is not the most important thing to me, or so it seems, according to this...I: So, when you say that it hasn’t helped you that much, it’s because you are comparing it with how much positive input helps you.AMN1: Hmm… Yes, yes, I would say yes.I: But, of course, I mean, what you’re saying is absolutely true, and there’s also this... this debate about whether it’s useful to correct mistakes or not, because some people believe that you only learn through exposure. But the goal of correcting a mistake is to work on precision, and, if you consider it just in that way, without taking into account how much being exposed to a language helps you, would you still say that it hasn’t helped you much?AMN1: Well, now I would probably select “three” instead of “two,” I mean… In fact, I mean, I don’t understand why I chose “two” at the time, so…I: Because you were comparing it to how much it helps you learn, well, being in immersion.AMN1: Yes.I: It’s normal. If you think about it that way, I agree with you. So, regarding the types of feedback that don’t give you the answer; I mean, if you had to choose… to choose between not being provided with the answer, but being required to correct the text yourself (so, having to work on the same text multiple times), or working on different texts with just corrections provided right away, which option would you prefer?AMN1: Hmm…I: I don’t know if I made myself clear. (Laughs.) I mean, would rather work recursively on the same text several times, or work on more texts, but never doing the work of finding the errors yourself?AMN1: (Thinks.) I prefer to write more texts, but, I mean, I understand that it’s essential to review mistakes.I: Ah, I don’t know, I’m not saying it’s essential.AMN1: Yes, but… Well, I think so, but now, I mean… Yes, my preference is more towards writing more texts, and practicing, practicing, practicing… Improving, yes, indirectly, but yes, also with corrections.I: (Nods.) And the issue of not looking for additional information about the types of errors you made, is it a matter of time, or is it because, as you mentioned, making mistakes doesn’t matter that much to you?AMN1: It’s a matter of time and of the number of errors made. I mean, when I write a text in Spanish, I make many mistakes, and I always will. It’s impossible to study every error, and feedback usually suffices to understand my mistakes, because it’s clear and useful, so there is no need to look any further. And if it is not clear and there are many errors of a certain type, I simply don’t have the time.I: Okay, that’s all regarding errors. Another thing I’ve looked at is the sophistication of vocabulary, meaning the frequency of vocabulary at each level, and the diversity and density of vocabulary. So, in terms of diversity, you can definitely see a progression from the first to the fourth writing task, with each one using more different words. But, in terms of the difficulty of the vocabulary... it actually goes down. Your first text uses very, very advanced vocabulary, and... Well, the fourth one is good too, but in the third one, for example... I mean, I don’t want to say it’s not good, okay? They’re all good, but...AMN1: No, I understand, I understand. Yes.I: There is no progression. So, in the process of writing a text, what are your priorities? I mean, were you trying to use more varied vocabulary, and that’s why there’s an improvement in this sense? Is it pure coincidence? And, in terms of vocabulary difficulty, how do you usually work?AMN1: Yes, I mean, I think the difficulty issue has to do with the genre of the text. I mean, you showed me an ironic text, an almost... I mean, I tried to create a literary text.I: (Nods.)AMN1: That was the first text, right?I: The first text was the one about prisons.AMN1: Oh, okay.I: It was an argument about whether prison serves its purpose, or if it should be replaced by another system.AMN1: And did I use more advanced vocabulary in this text?I: (Nods.)AMN1: Okay. And then that number went down?I: Alright, let’s see. The second writing task, which is the descriptive one, and the last one, which is the ironic text... These two don’t have vocabulary as complex as the first one, but they’re... I mean, yes, they are the next best ones, and they’re very close in quality. And the one with the least complex vocabulary, but as you said, it’s understandable because it’s an expository text, is the third task.AMN1: OK. And this one was about...I: It was a summary...AMN1: Ah.I: And you were talking about... (Shows it.)AMN1: Ah, that’s it. OK, OK, now I do, now I remember. Yes, yes, yes. Okay. I understand. OK. Well. I mean, as far as difficulty is concerned, I’m surprised that the maximum amount of advanced vocabulary isn’t in the literary text, that surprises me a little, but maybe the first text...I: Well, you made the first text a little bit literary too.AMN1: OK.I: I mean, first, you explained the story of someone who might end up in jail, then you moved on to the argumentative part, where you used a lot of academic vocabulary, I imagine you work on that a lot in Germany, and then you concluded again with a more literary paragraph. (Shows it.)AMN1: My uncle! Ah, that’s right. Well, yes. Hmm. I think that in the previous class we did a lot, I mean... We talked a lot about this topic, and you also introduced a lot of vocabulary that I later used in the text. So, I think that maybe helped me, because we talked specifically about the topic, whereas for the literary text, I had to gather the necessary vocabulary on my own. I think that, yes, plays a role here.I: What you’re saying is true. Yes, we did work on it... Well, I introduced the topic with some videos, and we covered that vocabulary.AMN1: The thing is that in class I always write down the new vocabulary that catches my attention, and, yes, that helps a lot. I mean, I learn a lot by memorizing, I like that.I: But, for example, to work on this text I also gave you a model that had many expressions, which you later took up as well, I remember.AMN1: (Nods.)I: For example, here... “Hacer el primo”. Hmm... There was another one that you had used... “Soplagaitas,” I think you wrote. I don’t see it underlined, but I have a feeling that I underlined it.AMN1: And did we work with that word in class or...I: Here, “soplagaitas.”AMN1: ... do you think I looked it up?I: I do remember that! I remember discussing it because... I think it wasn’t “soplagaitas,” it was... Oh, “soplapolleces” came up, and “soplagaitas” was mentioned as a synonym for “soplapollas.”AMN1: Hmm, okay.I: But yes, I do remember that we talked about it, although... Yes, yes, I remember, IDO1 asked about this word and then got embarrassed when I explained what it meant.AMN1: (Laughs.) Let’s see, yes.I: Let’s see, I think it has more to do with... I mean, yes, everything you’re saying is true, because you also incorporated a lot of the vocabulary we covered in class, like “exacerbarse.” But it’s also that the tone in which you wrote it is very, very academic. I mean, not in the introduction nor the ending, but in the middle. You used a lot of… For example, “se puede constatar” (it can be observed)... I mean, I calculated it automatically, I didn’t just look at it and say, “this is how it is.” But I remember you used a lot of very academic expressions... “Es imprescindible añadir” (it’s essential to add)... I don’t know, these kinds of constructions, as they are very formal, are at a C2 level. Although colloquial vocabulary is also at a C2 level, but still.AMN1: Okay, yes, I got that from the university courses I had taken before. Yes. And why did the number drop afterward? I don’t know, I think it has to do with the genres; in an ironic text, I tried to use more colloquial language. I suppose that’s the reason.I: And in terms of diversity, were you making a conscious effort to use more varied vocabulary? Because that’s where you did go up.AMN1: (Nods.) Yes, I avoided repetitions. Perhaps I also googled more words, maybe that was it, but I already did that in Germany too, and... But maybe yes, I looked for more words.I: Yes, I’m not saying this is because of the feedback, okay? It’s just another part of lexical competence that I’m looking at. Okay, I would say... Let me check for a moment. I think I’ve already asked you everything I wanted to ask. No, actually, yes, I’ve already asked you everything I wanted to ask. Now that you’re going to be a teacher, what kind of feedback...? Well, now you have to use this one, because it’s the one used in the school, but, if you could choose, what kind of feedback would you give?AMN1: Yes, ideally, you should cross it out, use a symbol… I mean, cross out the specific error, whether it’s just a letter or whatever, but make it very specific, not always the whole word every time. A symbol… I like the idea of using numbers and then also, I mean, explaining each error with a corresponding number. And… Regarding grammar, that seems ideal to me, and for text production, like… Yes, always providing a more… an explanation afterward and a concrete evaluation. That’s what I’ll do. I mean, I have to review 48 exams, but I have about two weeks because the holidays are starting here now as well. And that will give me plenty of time.
POST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH AMN1Original transcript in SpanishI: Entonces, primero voy a compartir pantalla. A ver… ¿se está compartiendo?AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Vale. Ah… espera, te lo quiero poner un poquito más grande.AMN1: Ah, sí… recuerdo ahora.I: Sí. Vale, estos eran como los tipos de feedback más frecuentes que se suelen utilizar en enseñanza de lenguas, y te voy a mostrar qué respuestas diste en su momento, y también te voy a preguntar si son tipos de feedback que has visto tú a lo largo de tu historia aprendiendo idiomas, o que te hayan enseñado, ¿no? Porque ahora dijiste que estabas estudiando para ser profesor, así que…AMN1: Sí.I: Esta es como la más básica, que es dar directamente la solución, sin más contexto que este, y dijiste que te parecía bastante clara, pero no muy útil. ¿Sigues pensando de esta manera?AMN1: Vale, déjame leer un minuto…I: Vale.AMN1: Vale. Mmm… Bueno, sí. Queda bastante claro. No sé por qué no puse “muy claras”, pero parece bastante claro todo.I: Hay un comentario.AMN1: Ah, vale.I: Si te ayuda.AMN1: Sí, bueno, a lo mejor haría falta escribir más sobre la gramática, tal vez, para que quede más claro el error. Porque, por ejemplo, aquí se propone vocabulario, pero en algunos casos tal vez es un error más profundo, que tiene que ver con falta de conocimiento sobre la gramática o…I: ¿Y estás familiarizado con este tipo de feedback?AMN1: Sí, o sea… De hecho, hoy tuve que revisar el primer examen que yo hice con mis alumnos… O sea, mismo hoy ese día, aprendí los símbolos que poner para errores gramaticales, ortográficos, etcétera, y en muchos casos ni siquiera ponemos como… la palabra correcta. Solo ponemos “VOC” para error de vocabulario, y a mí eso no me gusta, yo prefiero ponerlo más claro, y poner la palabra correcta o una propuesta, pero, si tienes que corregir como… mucho… no sé, 40 o 50 exámenes, a lo mejor no te da tiempo y prefieres hacerlo así.I: ¿Y después pedís a los estudiantes que entreguen una versión arreglada, cuando corregís de esta manera?AMN1: Sí.I: (Asiente.) El segundo tipo de feedback es como… el que a todos nos gustaría poder dar.AMN1: (Asiente y sonríe.)I: Pero, como has dicho, con 40 exámenes no es muy viable, que… En su momento, dijiste, claro, que te parecía muy claro y que era muy útil, y que así… Bueno, es muy optimista tu comentario… que con esta versión la persona puede entender e integrar el vocabulario que se le ha corregido. Entiendo entonces que piensas todavía así.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Este es un tipo de feedback no tan frecuente, que solo indica que hay errores, pero no dice dónde ni cuáles. Y este no te gustó nada: dijiste que no estaba nada claro y que eran… podían llegar a ser un poco útiles, pero principalmente… más que nada sugestivos e inútiles.AMN1: Vale, creo que es un poquito paradójico, porque eso sería útil para una persona muy avanzada, pero una persona muy avanzada no comete tantos errores, tal vez. Así que, no sé, no sirve tal vez.I: Este consiste simplemente en localizar el error sin corregirlo, y te pareció relativamente claro, pero nada útil. Y dijiste algo similar: que, si el estudiante tiene buen nivel, puede llegar a ser útil, pero, si no, pues… hace falta más conocimiento.AMN1: Vale, sí.I: Este es el tipo que me acabas de describir. En vez de “LEX”, puede ser que utilicéis otras categorías.AMN1: Sí.I: Es, la verdad, bastante popular este tipo de corrección, y ya dijiste lo que has dicho, que no te gustó demasiado, porque no las ves tan claras, y además… bueno, como consecuencia de no verlas claras, no las ves útiles.AMN1: Sí, o sea… Para la mayoría de mis alumnos, que tienen 15 años, no tienen mucha experiencia con… bueno, también aprenden el inglés, pero, sí, son más jóvenes y no reflexionan mucho, diría yo… y, por eso, eso a lo mejor sería muy poco… Sobre todo, la mayoría creo que ni siquiera lo revisa mucho y, si solo miran y ven “GRA”, “VOC”, “LEX”, lo que sea, a lo mejor no les da ganas de… sí, reflexionar más, o corregir, o pensar.I: ¿Y no se dedica un tiempo a familiarizar al estudiante con estas categorías antes de utilizarlas?AMN1: Mmm… Puede ser que sí. Es que yo tengo dos clases: son de 15 años. Esta escuela acepta alumnos a partir de los 13 años, así que creo que sí lo hacen cuando entran en la escuela, en el instituto, pero, sí, no sé, pero supongo que sí.I: Porque me has dicho que se pide a los estudiantes que arreglen las redacciones; entonces, en este proceso, deberían aprender a usar estas categorías, pero no es tu experiencia que sea así.AMN1: Sí, o sea, en esta escuela sí se pide que revisen todo, pero yo recuerdo que en mi escuela no siempre hacía falta hacerlo. Algunos profesores lo pedían y otros no, así que… Y usaban otros símbolos y otras abreviaturas, por eso también…I: Ahora… Gracias por mencionar esto, porque me doy cuenta de que me he olvidado de preguntarte si estás familiarizado con este con este tipo de corrección, la que da el comentario.AMN1: Mmm… Bueno, este me parece, sí…I: Perdón, es… La has recibido a lo largo de tu trayectoria como estudiante.AMN1: Así no, o sea, esta parte del examen, o del ejercicio, es como una parte, sí, de gramática. Normalmente, en la producción de textos, sí te ponen… te escriben un texto muy extenso sobre tus errores y sobre lo que mejorar, y tu expresión y todo, pero en la parte de gramática normalmente es solo un símbolo y nada más.I: (Asiente.) Esta no la han utilizado nunca contigo, ¿no?AMN1: Mmm… No, creo que no.I: ¿Esta?AMN1: Mmm…I: Es solo subrayar.AMN1: Mmm… Creo que solían usar un símbolo, al menos, sí.I: Vale, el símbolo ya has dicho que sí. Vale, este tipo es mediante preguntas o pistas indirectas y también indicando dónde está el error. Y te parecieron claras y relativamente útiles. Volviste a mencionar el tema de que haría falta tener cierto conocimiento metalingüístico para poder solucionarlo, pero bien.AMN1: Sí. Alumnos mayores, con más experiencia, sí. Eso sería útil, pero... Bueno, en mi caso, los de 15 años creo que no, pero en la universidad es bastante útil, creo, sí.I: ¿Y lo has experimentado?AMN1: Creo que no. No.I: Y este es el último tipo, que consiste en reformular todo el fragmento del estudiante y, manteniendo el mensaje, ofrecer un modelo de uso. Que este tipo te pareció un poco claro, pero no te resultó útil, porque no se ve dónde están los errores a simple vista.AMN1: Sí.I: ¿Y lo has…?AMN1: (Lee.)I: Ah, perdón, te dejo leer.AMN1: No, no. Sí, vale. Vale, sí. Es poco claro y no me parece muy útil. O sea, si los alumnos tienen que buscar todo y, si no les da ganas de revisar, eso también lo impide más.I: ¿Y lo has experimentado? ¿Algún profesor te ha corregido de esta manera?AMN1: No, nunca. Siempre marcaban los errores.I: Vale. Bueno, esto era un poco para recordarte los tipos de feedback con los que estoy trabajando. Entonces, ahora te voy a comentar un poco lo que he visto en el análisis para preguntarte por algunos errores concretos. A ver, en general, bueno, solo he mirado errores léxicos. Aunque, como he mirado también la combinatoria de palabras, a veces hay también de preposiciones y de determinantes, pero siempre es en relación con una expresión fija.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Entonces, la mayoría de tus errores tienen que ver con sustituciones, que significa usar una palabra que existe en el español, pero que no funciona en el contexto en el que lo has utilizado.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Problemas de preposición, que bueno, es lo normal, porque las preposiciones es lo más difícil de adquirir. Y luego problemas con determinantes. Y claro, de estos errores que has cometido, como las redacciones no son versiones de un mismo texto, solo algunos vuelven a aparecer en otras redacciones, porque eso depende de qué vocabulario utilizas en función del tema. Pero dentro de los que he podido detectar, también has corregido la mayoría de sustitución, de preposición y artículos. Entonces, de estos que he detectado, he mirado los que has corregido bien, los que parece que has intentado corregir, pero no ha acabado de funcionar bien en el nuevo contexto, y otros errores que se han repetido, o sea, como que el feedback no ha funcionado. Cuando miremos esto… No te estoy juzgando, solo quiero ver qué funcionó y qué no funcionó, pero obviamente… O sea, quiero dejar claro que eres un muy buen estudiante y que no es un juicio de valor esto.AMN1: Bueno, claro, entiendo.I: Vale, entonces, a ver, aquí es donde empezaremos a pasar por muchos documentos, y te pido paciencia.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: A ver, de acuerdo con tus preferencias, el mejor tipo de feedback es el que incluye el comentario, y no te gustan… O sea, realmente los dos tipos de feedback que parece que han surtido efecto en el sentido de que los has aplicado en redacciones posteriores, son el que incluye comentario y el que da la solución directamente sin comentario. Con lo cual, parece que tus preferencias se ajustan a lo que te sirve. Entonces, dentro de los dos tipos de feedback, el que parece que te ha servido más es el que no da comentario metalingüístico, pero a la vez es normal porque es mucho más frecuente. No me dedicaba a ponerte comentarios todo el rato, también por una cuestión de tiempo. Entonces, como el que más te gusta es el metalingüístico, o sea, el que incluye el comentario, vamos a mirar los dos ejemplos donde sí apareció… Bueno, donde sí puede parecer que haya una aplicación de feedback, aunque luego, ahora, cuando lo veamos, puede ser que me digas que es pura casualidad, que eso también puede ocurrir, que son un error de número y de orden. Un momento. Quería mirar los… Vale, empezamos primero por esto y luego miraré los errores de sustitución, que eran los tuyos más frecuentes. A ver, esto era en el segundo. Vale, este era… Aplicó bien… Bueno, realmente pienso que este caso… Te lo muestro igualmente, pero creo que el error que cometiste no era realmente porque no tuvieras este conocimiento, sino porque a veces, cuando la frase es muy larga, si no la lees, olvidas cuál es el antecedente y no se ajusta el número por eso. Que era aquí: “Por eso los recuerdos escasos de la Tierra que han mantenido en su mente no les pudo* proporcionar…” ¿Confirmas esto, no?AMN1: (Lee.)I: Es aquí, perdón. (Lo selecciona.)AMN1: Vale, vale. ¿Y a qué error te refieres?I: A este de aquí. (Lo señala.)AMN1: “No les pudo proporcionar la anhelada distracción”. Vale, sí, claro, “recuerdos”… “pudieron”. Vale, sí.I: Vale, entonces, el otro que tenemos con metalingüística es… vale, en “verdadera”. Aquí está. Vale, aquí sí te puse un comentario más elaborado, que era el orden de esta oración: “Sin embargo, la razón verdadera por la que bla, bla, bla”. El “verdadera” tendría que ir delante, porque, si va detrás, significa otra cosa. Te lo pongo más grande para que puedas leer el comentario. Aquí. Y, entonces, bueno, te dejo leer el comentario, aunque no tiene demasiada relevancia, solo por si te puedes acordar de algo.AMN1: Con el inglés, sí, con el inglés quedó bastante claro después, sí, eso ayudó.I: Y entonces aquí pusiste el orden correcto. Y mi pregunta, que probablemente no puedas acordarte, pero… ¿fue esto casualidad o fue que el feedback funcionó?AMN1: El feedback funcionó, sí, seguramente, en este caso funcionó.I: Vale, esto en cuanto a tipos de feedback. Y, entonces, de tipos de error, me interesan los de sustitución, que en tu caso la mayoría son problemas entre el ser y el estar. Vamos a ver el primero, que sería este: “el miedo…” Aquí está. Vale, pusiste… Te lo pongo más grande. Bueno, esto es excesivamente grande. Aquí. Pusiste: “el miedo es muy presente”, en vez de “está muy presente”. Y, entonces, en otras… Normalmente lo vas usando bien, pero aquí estaría “la cumbre era cubierta”, como error repetido. Y luego tienes dos usos correctos con “estaban colgadas” y “estar ocupados”.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Vale, y esto es… O sea, mi pregunta aquí es: con el “ser” y el “estar”, ¿hacías un trabajo consciente con el feedback o ibas probando? Porque yo recuerdo que dijiste una vez sobre los pasados, como que es imposible entenderlos. Y, entonces, como que vas haciendo al azar, o no al azar, pero lo que te suena bien, sin pensarlo demasiado. En este caso, ¿dirías que es lo mismo?AMN1: Es parecido. O sea, en el caso de los tiempos hay como pistas que te ayudan a entenderlo, pero al final es un entendimiento cultural del tiempo. Y si en otra lengua entendemos diferentemente el tiempo, o ni siquiera hacemos esta distinción… En alemán, yo diría que la distinción entre imperfecto e indefinido no juega un papel muy grande. Por eso, sí, me cuesta, y al final, si hablas más rápidamente, sueles hacerlo más espontáneamente. En el caso de “ser” y “estar”, claro, también tengo mis reglas y mis ideas sobre esto y lo que he aprendido, pero, en este caso, ¿por qué puse “era cubierto” y no “estaba”...?I: O sea, no te pregunto por qué lo hiciste, porque obviamente no lo hiciste a propósito, pero ¿crees que estabas usando el feedback sobre el “ser” y el “estar” a la hora de escribir, o lo hiciste por tu cuenta?AMN1: ¿“Era cubierto” lo escribí primero y después “estaba”?I: Primero escribiste “es muy presente”, “el miedo es muy presente”. Luego escribiste, “la cumbre era cubierta”. Y luego… Bueno, dentro de la misma redacción también pusiste “estaban colgadas”, que esto es correcto, y luego, en la cuarta redacción, “estar ocupados”. O sea, me estoy fijando solo en el “ser” y el “estar” con adjetivos.AMN1: Vale.I: Yo esto todo lo corregí solo tachándote el verbo y poniéndote el correcto, o sea, no te di ninguna explicación. Aunque dimos una clase sobre el “ser” y el “estar”, pero no es algo que se aprenda en una clase.AMN1: Sí, tal vez, sí. No sé si fue muy consciente al final, pero creo que tal vez cuando vi que si uso “ser” con adjetivos suele ser falso, tal vez cambié mi estrategia y usé más “estar” después. Así que puede ser que el feedback sí tuvo un impacto, pero no me acuerdo muy conscientemente si lo revisé.I: Si crees que no, que no te sepa mal decirlo. Me interesa saber, o sea… No hace falta que digas que sí, si crees que no. No me voy a ofender porque no usases el feedback, a esto me refiero.AMN1: Vale. (Ríe.) Bueno, o sea, el caso del adjetivo y la pre- o post-posición, como en el caso de “verdadero”, es muy fácil, o sea, ves los ejemplos del inglés, lo entiendes y lo aplicas y ya está. Y esto es como, bueno, en este caso sería mejor usar, o sería correcto usar “estar”, pero hay mil millones de casos y nunca sabes, o sea, es como…I: Sí, sí.AMN1: Es más difícil.I: Vale, y el error que más me interesa de sustitución es el “dentro de”.AMN1: Ah, sí, eso me cuesta. (Ríe.) Sí.I: A ver, este es después, el primero que hiciste… Aquí. Sí, este error me interesa mucho, porque primero lo utilizaste incorrectamente en el vídeo de APN, después lo utilizaste incorrectamente en esta redacción, y yo te lo corregí solo tachando y poniendo “en cuestión de”. Entonces, en la segunda, espera… Sí, en la segunda… En la segunda redacción lo pusiste bien, o sea, pusiste “en cuestión de”. Luego, en la cuarta, volviste a poner “dentro de”. En esa ocasión, te lo corregí explicándotelo con un comentario y luego, en el examen final, volviste a poner bien “en cuestión de”. Entonces, mi pregunta es, ¿te suena este error en ti? ¿Y por qué piensas que el feedback funciona o no funciona a este respecto?AMN1: (Ríe.)I: O sea, la distinción entre “dentro de” o “en cuestión de”, a nivel temporal, es que “dentro de” solo funciona en presente. O sea, si estoy hablando ahora, puedo hablar de lo que pasará dentro de tanto tiempo, pero, si lo uso en un pasado, no puedo hablar de “dentro de diez minutos ya llegó alguien”. Tengo que decir “después de diez minutos” o “en cuestión de diez minutos, llegó esta persona”.AMN1: Vale. ¿Y me lo explicaste así o solo lo pusiste como error y…?I: Eso es lo que te iba a decir. En la primera redacción donde vi que lo ponías mal, solo lo taché y te puse “en cuestión de”.AMN1: Okey.I: Entonces tú, en la segunda redacción, pusiste “en cuestión de”, en vez de “dentro de”. O sea, pareció que habías arreglado el error. Pero luego, en la cuarta, volviste a poner “dentro de”, y ahí sí que te lo corregí con un comentario, te lo puedo mostrar. A ver, aquí. Ay… ¿Por qué se hace pequeño? ¿Esto no es el “más”? Aquí. Te puse este comentario, donde te explicaba un poco lo que te he dicho del presente, y luego en el examen final me lo pusiste bien otra vez.AMN1: (Asiente y lee el comentario.) Vale, mmm… ¿Por qué volví a cometer el error y después ya no? Esa es la cuestión. Bueno…I: Lo arreglaste dos veces.AMN1: Sí. O sea, la explicación me parece muy clara, se entiende y tal vez en el examen me fijé más. O sea, es más concentración, más atención y en la tarea o el ejercicio que hicimos, a lo mejor, no sé. Sí.I: Pero cuando aplicaste el primer “en cuestión de”, que fue en la segunda redacción, y mi único feedback había sido tachártelo… Pusiste “dentro de unos segundos” y yo simplemente te lo taché y te puse esto. (Lo muestra.)AMN1: Sí.I: Tú, en la segunda redacción, pusiste “en cuestión de”. Aquí.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: O sea que primero lo arreglaste y luego otra vez falló, otra vez lo arreglé y lo hiciste bien en el examen final. Pero no, o sea, intuyo por el hecho de que no te suene nada este error, que en realidad todo esto era casualidad.AMN1: Tal vez también fue un error como muy… Como… Yo ya había entrenado este comportamiento de poner “dentro de” y, cuando me lo explicaste, reflexioné y lo apliqué bien, pero, como no lo tenía que repetir muchas veces, y después de un tiempo ya no me acordaba bien y puse otra vez este error… Y en el examen presté más atención y, tal vez, no sé ahora si había revisado mucho antes de escribir el examen todos los textos… Creo que no, pero tal vez eso me ayudó a hacerlo bien al final.I: Ahora cuando te explicaba la diferencia entre los dos, ¿es una diferencia que tenías clara? O sea, ahora te la explico y la entiendes, pero ¿antes? O sea, no es algo que haya quedado en tu mente.AMN1: En este caso no, no.I: Yo diría que de sustitución… Ah, bueno, me interesa este: el “ni”, que está en el segundo. (Lo busca.) Mmm… Ay, no encuentra los espacios, a ver dónde estará. Creo que estaba por el principio. Aquí, sí. “Además, ni el peso corporal de los taikonautas se parecía al de la Tierra”. Este uso del “ni” no lo he detectado… ¿A ver? Un segundo, a ver si lo tengo en otra redacción. Vale, pero esto está como aplicado… Vale, no, aquí no volviste a fallarlo, pero este es un error que recuerdo que habías cometido en otra ocasión, pero es posible que no fuera en una redacción, sino simplemente que me suene que dijeras alguna vez o en un examen. Que es este uso… A ver: “Además, ni el peso corporal de los taikonautas se parecía al de la Tierra”. Si tú ahora ves esta oración, ¿entiendes por qué no está bien este “ni”?AMN1: Sí, o sea, una pregunta, ¿poner “ni siquiera” sería correcto?I: Sí.AMN1: Vale, bueno, ese es el error. O sea, no puse “siquiera” después, no sé por qué. O sea, no sé, tal vez daba prisa y no...I: A mí me da la impresión de que es como un calco del inglés, como “nor”.AMN1: Mmm… Ah, vale. (Asiente.) Bueno, en alemán... en alemán es parecido al español, también sería… son dos palabras: “ni siquiera”, “nicht einmal”, así que en alemán sería como el español. Sí, me sorprende que cometiera ese error.I: Bueno, a veces pasa. Es que usamos partes distintas del cerebro para hablar idiomas extranjeros.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Vale, diría que en este sentido... Ah, sí, me interesa ver los que pareció que aplicabas una corrección, pero no tenía éxito. Y los errores que repetiste, aunque algunos ya los... el “dentro de” lo hemos visto. Vale, me interesan los errores de deixis. Este... “prohibir y abolir”. A ver. Lo siento que es un poco pesado, pero...AMN1: No, está bien.I: Vale, aquí. Este error lo repetiste dos veces y lo aplicaste bien una vez. Y aquí me da la impresión de que es como el “ser” y el “estar”, que es algo que haces también por intuición: la distinción entre “este” y “ese”.AMN1: (Lee.) Mmm. O sea, “estos” es lo correcto y “esos” es lo falso.I: Al revés.AMN1: Al revés. Ah, vale, al revés. Yo puse...I: Tú pusiste “estos” y debería ser “esos”.AMN1: Okey.I: Y aquí también. Pusiste “estos desgraciados” y “esta especie”, y debería ser “esos desgraciados” y “esa especie”.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Pero aquí lo pusiste bien: “¿qué significaría...?” Bueno, el “significaría” no estaría bien, pero es un error gramatical en el que no me estoy fijando. Sería correcto el “eso”. Y todo esto lo he corregido sin comentario.AMN1: Vale, o sea, solo me... lo tachaste y... okey. Uf… (Ríe.) Creo que fue casualidad. O sea, no... sí. O sea, ahora yo no entiendo por qué lo hice o…I: (Asiente.)AMN1: Ni entiendo la regla por qué. No… No, sí, no sé.I: O sea, ¿crees que es algo que todavía no has adquirido?AMN1: O sea, no me queda claro por qué no funciona bien, así que no. No.I: A ver, claro, a ver, es que viendo la frase sola, aislada, gramaticalmente es correcto. Entonces, por eso no lo tienes claro. A ver, esto… en la cuatro. Ah, mira, en esta en concreto sí que te puse cierto comentario. Aquí. Te expliqué que es que ya no están. O sea, porque tú en la redacción le pides a la gente que se vaya. Entonces, una vez se han ido, le hablas como al lector que se ha quedado y le dices... “Qué alivio que esos desgraciados se hayan marchado”. Dijiste “estos”, pero tiene que ser “esos” porque ya no están, ya que se han marchado. Entonces están lejos.AMN1: Vale. (Asiente.)I: Entonces sí que es una diferencia que entiendes.AMN1: Sí, o sea, depende de la presencia, si están o no. Sí… Bueno, ahora lo entiendo, sí. Bueno, también, sí. Sí. Queda muy claro, sí.I: Sí, ¿tú crees que lo viste claro en su momento al ver solo este comentario, “ya no están”?AMN1: Sí, o sea... Sí, sin duda, queda muy claro, sí.I: Vale, yo diría que esto es suficiente en cuanto a tus errores en concreto, porque esto... Sí, errores de preposición y de determinante, por mucho que... O sea, será la misma historia, que se hace un poco por intuición. Entonces, vale, de acuerdo con lo que habías dicho en el cuestionario, que era aquí... Vale, habías dicho, que por eso también me interesaba hacer la entrevista contigo, que… O sea, se desprendía de tus respuestas, que tampoco te parece tan importante el feedback. No es un juicio, repito. (Ríe.) Pero, o sea, dijiste que sí que te parece importante que te devuelvan las tareas corregidas, pero tampoco muy importante. Y luego dijiste que, en general, o sea, no sueles buscar información adicional sobre los errores que te dan, o sea, que cometes y que te marcan. Que si no entiendes algún comentario no le das importancia, y que no te ha hecho aprender demasiado el feedback. Entonces, no sé si sigues pensando así, pero, si es así, ¿puedes explicar un poco más tu opinión?AMN1: Vale, o sea, lo de leer los feedbacks y revisar los errores… O sea, antes de acabar mi carrera escolar, sí empecé a leer los feedbacks mucho y… sí, para tener mejores notas, y reflexioné mucho. Pero antes, o sea, la mayoría de mi tiempo en la escuela, no leí los feedbacks. Por eso, sí, más tarde era más importante para mí. En la universidad sí, sí, lo leo y me parece útil, así que, ¿por qué puse...? Es que a mí me gusta aprender lenguas con contenido, o sea, escucho música, leo textos, escribo textos y también me gusta recibir una corrección, pero es más como… Me gusta como… Sí, contacto positivo con la lengua. Y lo de revisar los errores, eso es importante, pero… Sí, mi manera de aprender es más indirecta. Escucho lo correcto e intento imitarlo, y, si cometo un error, bueno, hay que revisarlo, pero tampoco es lo más importante para mí, o me parece, según este...I: Entonces, cuando respondes a que no te ha ayudado tanto, es porque lo estás comparando con lo que te ayuda el input positivo.AMN1: Mmm… Sí, sí, diría que sí.I: Pero, claro, o sea, lo que dices es totalmente cierto, y además hay como una... como una pelea entre si es útil corregir o no, porque hay gente que opina que solo se aprende por exposición. Pero el objetivo de corregir un error es trabajar precisión, y, si lo consideras solo así, o sea, sin tener en cuenta lo mucho que te ayuda estar expuesto a un idioma, ¿también dirías que te ha ayudado poco?AMN1: Bueno, ahora yo a lo mejor pondría tres en vez de dos, o sea… Es más, o sea, no entiendo por qué puse dos en ese momento, así que...I: Porque lo comparabas con lo que te ayuda a aprender, pues, estar en inmersión.AMN1: Sí.I: Es normal. Si lo piensas así, estoy de acuerdo contigo. Entonces, en cuanto a los tipos de feedback que no te dan la respuesta; o sea, si tú tuvieras que poner… que elegir entre que no te diesen la respuesta, pero te exigiesen corregir el texto (entonces, trabajar sobre un mismo texto más veces), o trabajar sobre distintos textos con la respuesta directamente, ¿qué preferirías?AMN1: Mmm…I: No sé si me he explicado bien. (Ríe.) O sea, preferirías trabajar recursivamente sobre un mismo texto varias veces, o trabajar más textos, pero nunca haciendo el trabajo de buscar tú el error.AMN1: (Piensa.) Prefiero escribir más textos, pero, o sea, entiendo que es esencial revisar los errores.I: Ah, yo no lo sé, no digo que sea esencial.AMN1: Sí, pero… Bueno, creo que sí, pero ahora, o sea… sí, la tendencia para mí es más hacia escribir más textos, y entrenar, entrenar, entrenar… Mejorar, sí, indirectamente, pero sí, también con correcciones.I: (Asiente.) Y el tema de no buscar información adicional sobre los tipos de error, ¿es por una cuestión de tiempo, o por lo que has dicho de que tampoco te importa tanto cometer errores?AMN1: Tiempo y la cantidad de errores, o sea, cuando escribo un texto en español hay un montón de errores, o sea, y siempre habrá muchos errores, y por eso es como imposible buscar cada error. En muchas ocasiones entiendo directamente lo que hice mal, porque hay una explicación clara y útil, así que no hace falta buscar más, y, si no queda claro y son muchos errores de este tipo, no me da tiempo.I: Vale, y ya esto era todo en relación con errores. También otra cosa que he mirado es la sofisticación del vocabulario, o sea, la frecuencia de vocabulario de cada nivel, y la diversidad y la densidad del vocabulario. Entonces, en cuanto a la diversidad, sí que se ve una progresión entre… o sea, de la primera a la cuarta redacción, cada vez usas más palabras diferentes, pero, en cuanto a la dificultad del vocabulario, o sea… Va todo hacia abajo. Tu primer texto usa vocabulario muy, muy, muy avanzado, y… Bueno, el cuarto está bien, pero en el tercero, por ejemplo… O sea, no quiero decir que no esté bien, ¿eh? Están bien todos, pero…AMN1: No, entiendo, entiendo. Sí.I: No hay una progresión. Entonces, en el proceso de escribir los textos, ¿cuáles son tus prioridades? Es decir, ¿tú estabas intentando usar vocabulario más variado, y por eso hay una mejora en este sentido? ¿Es pura casualidad? Y, en cuanto a la dificultad del vocabulario, ¿cómo sueles trabajar?AMN1: Sí, o sea, lo de la dificultad creo que tiene que ver con el género del texto. O sea, me mostraste un texto irónico, un texto casi... o sea, intenté crear un texto literario.I: (Asiente.)AMN1: Que fue el primer texto, ¿no?I: El primer texto fue el de las cárceles.AMN1: Ah, vale.I: Era una argumentación sobre si la cárcel cumple su objetivo, o si debería sustituirse por otro sistema.AMN1: ¿Y en este texto usé más vocabulario avanzado?I: (Asiente.)AMN1: Okey. ¿Y después bajó ese número?I: Bueno, a ver. La segunda redacción, que es la descriptiva, y la última, que es la del texto irónico… Estas dos no tienen vocabulario tan complejo como el primero, pero están... O sea, sí, son las dos siguientes que son mejores, y están muy empatadas las dos. Y la que tiene menos, pero, como dices, es normal, porque es un texto expositivo, es la tercera tarea.AMN1: Vale. Que fue sobre…I: Era un resumen…AMN1: Ah.I: Y hablabas... (La muestra.)AMN1: Ah, eso. Vale, vale, ahora sí, ahora me acuerdo. Sí, sí, sí. Okey. Entiendo. Vale. Ah, ya. Bueno. O sea, en cuanto a la dificultad, me sorprende que la cantidad máxima de vocabulario avanzado no esté en el texto literario, eso me sorprende un poquito, pero tal vez el primer texto...I: Es que el primer texto lo hiciste un poco literario también.AMN1: Vale.I: O sea, primero explicaste como la historia de alguien que podría acabar en la cárcel, luego te pusiste a hacer la parte de la argumentación, que además usabas muchísimo vocabulario académico, me imagino que lo trabajáis mucho en Alemania, y concluías luego otra vez con un párrafo más literario. (Lo va mostrando.)AMN1: ¡Mi tío! Ah, vale, eso, eso. Bueno, sí. Mmm. Es que creo que en la clase anterior hicimos mucho, o sea… hablamos mucho de este tema y también introdujiste mucho vocabulario que después usé en el texto. O sea, creo que tal vez eso me ayudó, porque hablamos concretamente del tema, mientras que para el texto literario yo tuve que recoger el vocabulario necesario. Creo que eso, sí, juega un papel aquí.I: Es verdad lo que dices. Sí que trabajamos... Bueno, introduje el tema con unos vídeos y tratamos este vocabulario.AMN1: Es que yo en las aulas siempre escribo el vocabulario nuevo que me llama la atención, y, sí, eso ayuda bastante. O sea, yo aprendo mucho aprendiendo de memoria, eso me gusta.I: Pero, por ejemplo, para trabajar este texto también os di un modelo que tenía muchas expresiones, que luego tú recuperaste también, recuerdo.AMN1: (Asiente.)I: Por ejemplo, aquí… “Hacer el primo”. Mmm… Había otra que habías... “Soplagaitas”, creo que habías puesto. No lo veo subrayado, pero tengo la sensación de haberlo subrayado.AMN1: ¿Y tratamos esa palabra en la clase o…I: Aquí, “soplagaitas”.AMN1: ¿… crees que la busqué?I: ¡Sí que lo recuerdo! Sí que recuerdo haberla tratado porque... O sea, creo que no era “soplagaitas”, era... Ah, salía “soplapolleces” y “soplagaitas” salía como sinónimo de “soplapollas”.AMN1: Mmm, vale.I: Pero sí recuerdo que sí que hablamos, aunque... Sí, sí, me acuerdo, IDO1 preguntó sobre esta palabra y luego se avergonzó cuando le expliqué lo que era.AMN1: (Ríe.) A ver, sí.I: A ver, yo creo que tiene más que ver con... O sea, sí que es cierto todo lo que dices, porque además incorporaste mucho del vocabulario que habíamos tratado en clase, como el “exacerbarse”. Pero también es que el tono con el que lo has escrito es muy, muy académico. O sea, no en el prólogo y al final, sino en el centro. Utilizas muchos… Por ejemplo, “se puede constatar”... A ver, yo lo he calculado de manera automática, no lo he mirado y he dicho: “esto es lo que hay”. Pero recuerdo que utilizabas muchas expresiones muy académicas. “Es imprescindible añadir”… No sé, este tipo de construcciones, como son muy formales, son de nivel C2. Aunque el vocabulario coloquial también es de nivel C2, pero bueno.AMN1: Vale, sí, eso lo tengo de mis cursos universitarios que había visitado antes. Sí. ¿Y por qué bajó el número después? No sé, yo creo que tiene que ver con los géneros, que en un texto irónico intenté usar un lenguaje más coloquial. Supongo que es eso.I: Y a nivel de diversidad, ¿estabas haciendo un esfuerzo consciente por usar vocabulario más variado? Porque ahí sí que subiste.AMN1: (Asiente.) Sí, evitar repeticiones… No sé si busqué más palabras por Google, si fue eso, tal vez. Pero eso ya lo hacía en Alemania también y… Pero puede ser que sí, busqué más palabras.I: Sí, esto no te digo que sea por el feedback, ¿eh? Es solo otra parte de la competencia léxica que miro. Vale, yo diría que... Déjame comprobar un momento. Creo que te he preguntado ya todo lo que quería. No, pues sí, ya te pregunté todo lo que quería preguntar. Ahora que vas a ser profesor, ¿qué tipo de feedback...? Bueno, ahora tienes que usar este, porque es el que se usa en la escuela, pero, si eligieses tú, ¿qué tipo de feedback darías?AMN1: Sí, lo ideal es tacharlo, usar un símbolo… O sea, tachar el error concreto, si es solo una letra o lo que sea, pero hacerlo muy concreto, no toda la palabra siempre. Un símbolo… Me gusta lo de los números y después poner también, o sea, explicar cada error con un número. Y… En la parte de gramática, eso me parece lo ideal, y en la parte donde hay una producción de texto, como… Sí, siempre poner un texto más… una explicación después y una evaluación concreta. Eso lo haré yo. O sea, yo tengo que revisar 48 exámenes, pero tengo como dos semanas porque ahora empiezan las vacaciones aquí también. Y eso me dará mucho tiempo.
POST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH ARE1English translation (original transcript in Spanish below)I: Alright, let’s try it like this. Let’s see if it works for us. Now, the part that interests me the most at the moment is the last section of the questionnaire, which was the one that showed different types of feedback. I’m not going to ask you specific questions about this part, because you already left very detailed comments, but just to remind you of the types of feedback we were looking at... We had this one, which is simply crossing out the mistake and providing the correct answer.ARE1: (Nods.)I: About this one, you said it seemed very clear, but depending on the type of error, it might be necessary to include an example, especially if it’s a recurring mistake, to ensure that the feedback can truly be applied. The second type of feedback was also giving the solution, but adding an explanation below.ARE1: (Nods.)I: And, about this type of feedback, you mentioned the opposite: that for difficult errors, it’s very useful, but maybe for correcting something like an accent mark, it’s not necessary to add so much background noise with explanations, especially if the learners have an advanced level. Okay, the third type consisted of only indicating, for example… There are three errors in this line, two in that line… Without explaining exactly where they are or what they consist of. And this was one of the ones you liked the least: you found it unclear and not very useful because, since the errors are of different types, the student doesn’t know what to focus on. The fourth type of feedback I mentioned, or rather asked about, was this one, which consists of underlining where the error is without indicating the solution, so that the student can... look for it. You found this one a bit better than the previous one, which didn’t indicate anything, but you still thought it lacked giving the student more clues... More guidance to solve the problems. The fifth type of feedback was this one, which also involves underlining but adding a clue about whether it’s a vocabulary error or a grammar error... And you found this very useful, for example, for identifying areas of improvement, right? If most of the mistakes are in grammar, then... you see that this is where you should focus. But it also requires a lot of time investment to find the solution yourself, and then it also requires additional feedback from the teacher. The sixth and penultimate type of feedback consists of giving metalinguistic clues in the form of a question to make the student reflect on what the error might be. And about this, you said something similar to the previous one: that it requires a big time investment and a second review by the teacher, and that the reflection is useful, but it also requires... Well, a lot of work and also metalinguistic knowledge on the part of the student. And the last type consisted of... Reformulating a whole fragment written by the student in order to offer a model that maintains the message but has corrected or changed all the sentences to make them more idiomatic. And this was also one of the ones you liked the least because you felt it could serve as a model before the task, but afterward, it doesn’t help the student improve their text. Up to this point, does all of this sound familiar to you? Do you feel like you still hold the same opinions?ARE1: Yes. Yes, yes, yes.I: Okay, perfect. Okay, so now we move on to talk about your writing tasks. So, let’s see… Here… I don’t expect you to process this, okay? These are just documents for me.ARE1: (Nods.)I: Let’s see... It should be here... This should be smaller. I’m going to leave it like this. Oh, of course... Because by zooming in the questionnaire, this has been zoomed in too. Let’s see... Okay. So, well... I’ve looked at everyone’s writing tasks, and I’ll briefly explain... I’ve focused mainly on vocabulary errors; however, as I’ve also looked at word combinatorics, well... Sometimes, in a combination there are also errors dealing with prepositions or articles, but it’s always in relation to a multiword fixed expression.ARE1: (Nods.)I: So, most of the errors that you’ve made are substitution errors, which consist of using a word that exists in Spanish, but in a context that doesn’t quite work. And, in fact, in the rest of the areas that I’ve looked at, you made very few errors. I mean, most of them are like that, substitution errors.ARE1: (Nods.)I: So, out of these errors, the ones you fixed the most were precisely the more grammatical ones, such as those dealing with articles, prepositions, and spelling. But, of course, this doesn’t mean that the feedback on substitution errors wasn’t effective, but rather… Of course, since we have different writing tasks, you’re going to use different vocabulary depending on the topic. So, there are some errors that I haven’t been able to see if they were fixed or not, because they didn’t appear again in subsequent tasks.ARE1: (Nods.)I: There wasn’t any mistake that you corrected incorrectly... I mean, I also checked if you tried to apply the correction but it was still unsuccessful... And you did repeat some mistakes with determiners and prepositions. So, what I want to look at first of all... Most of the corrections that seem to have worked are the first two, which are also the ones you liked the most: directly indicating the solution or indicating the solution with a comment. So, let’s take a look at this mistake here: “por otro lado.” Okay, here it is. And you made this mistake in the first writing task and corrected it in the third one. Alright, now I’m interested in making sure you can see this, so let me know what size you’d like this to be. Let’s see... like this?ARE1: Yes, that’s fine.I: Okay, perfect. So here... Alright, here, for example, with this connector, you wrote “al otro lado.” And I crossed it out and wrote “por otro lado.” And then, in your third writing task… This one will be a bit harder to find because I can’t search directly…ARE1: (Laughs.)I: Let’s see, “por otro lado” should be…ARE1: Here it is, in the second… No, yes, second paragraph.I: Yes? At the beginning or towards the end?ARE1: “Naciones”… Towards the end. “Naciones periféricas,” and then it says “por otro lado,” I don’t know if you can see it. (Laughs.)I: Let’s see, “naciones periféricas”… Ah, okay, okay. Ah, here. Here, okay. Yes, yes, yes. Here it is, okay, yes. Here’s “por otro lado.” So, the question would be: do you think that from the simple fact that I crossed out “al” and wrote “por” here, you realized that this was the correct form of the connector and that’s why you used it? Or do you think that maybe the error with “al otro lado” was just a one-time thing, because you already knew that this was the correct way to say it?ARE1: I think I had some uncertainty about it. Like… Whether “al otro lado” existed or if it was always “por otro lado.”I: (Nods.) I mean…ARE1: I don’t think it was just a one-time mistake. I don’t think so.I: Okay. So, the expression “al otro lado” does exist, but it’s not used as a connector to organize discourse. I mean, you can tell someone: “espera al otro lado” (wait on the other side)…ARE1: Ah, right, right.I: So that’s correct, but in discourse, especially formal discourse, the connector is “por un lado” (on one hand) and “por el otro lado” (on the other hand).ARE1: (Nods.)I: Right.ARE1: Of course, if it’s about a location, then you can use “al otro lado”.I: Exactly. Exactly.ARE1: Yeah, so I guess that was it. I knew both expressions, but I wasn’t sure how to use them in the right context. Aha.I: (Nods.) So, do you think that, for example, the fact that you used “por el otro lado” here in the third writing task could be because you looked at the feedback? Or were you just trying out what came to mind in each case?ARE1: No, I think it was the feedback.I: OK. Great. I can’t find the cursor. Let’s see... Where...? Here it is. Oh, but I can’t see it... Does it disappear when I...? Ah, OK, here it is, I see it, I’m sorry. (Laughs.)ARE1: No. (Laughs.)I: No, no, but it’s not... Not here... There. I wanted to switch applications... Okay, another error that interests me a lot is this one: “los afectados de/por un crimen” (those affected by a crime). “Afectados”… Here. Is it this one? Yes. Okay, and this was in the first writing task, I think. Yes. And you corrected it... For example, in the second task it’s fixed. Okay. “Afectados”… Okay, here, for example. “Los afectados de un crimen”… With “afectado”, the preposition is “por”. And I didn’t give you any explanation, I just crossed it out and wrote it here. And then, in the descriptive text, here, you said: “fue una de las más afectadas por el pedrisco” (it was one of the most affected by the hailstorm). Here, it’s corrected. So again, the question is: do you think this had anything to do with the feedback? Or is it something that you normally would use this preposition for, and in the previous case, it was just a slip?ARE1: Good question. (Thinks and laughs.)I: (Laughs.) In the other case, you wrote “afectados de un crimen.”ARE1: Aha. It’s a bit strange because, in this context, “por” seems fine to me, but in the other context, I think I would still write, even today, “los afectados de.” Aha. I’m not sure, but I think so. (Laughs.)I: No, that’s very interesting. Yes, yes. Okay, and do you think that if, instead of… For example, in this case, I just crossed it out and gave you the correct preposition. If I had added a comment like “with ‘afectados,’ when expressing the cause, i.e., that which affects, we use ‘por’”… Like in the second type of feedback I showed you, do you think it would have stuck with you longer?ARE1: (Thinks.) Maybe, yes. Now I’m looking at it, I think it’s something from German.I: Ah, that could be.ARE1: Yes, because in German it would be “los afectados de un crimen”. Well, “de un crimen” would be a… What do you call it?I: A calque.ARE1: Yes, like a word, a noun.I: Ah, okay, okay.ARE1: And in the other sentence, it wouldn’t be a word.I: Here: “las más afectadas por el pedrisco”.ARE1: Aha.I: Ah, that’s so interesting!ARE1: I think that’s why.I: Yes, yes, yes. Very interesting. Let’s see... Okay, let’s look at this one, which is a substitution error, like I mentioned in another case, which is the distinction between “ser” and “estar.”ARE1: (Nods.)I: Obviously, this type of error, with past tenses or “ser” and “estar,” isn’t solved with a single instance of feedback. That’s understandable.ARE1: I still get it wrong, I think. (Laughs.)I: Well, because it’s true, like... This is like when a Spanish speaker learns German: the articles... If the words are unusual, they’ll always get them wrong, even if they have a very advanced level.ARE1: Yeah.I: Let’s see, this was in the first writing task, and in the third one, it appears twice. “Está separado,” “estar conectado,” and “estar involucrado.” Okay... Task 2... “Es separado.” Okay,  this is Task 2. Alright, here. You had written: “Entre ellas, el vecindario… Un poblado de 800 personas que es separado” (among them, the neighborhood... A town of 800 people that is separated), but it should be “está separado.” And then, in Task 3, you do use “estar conectado” and “estar involucrado.” So, in this… I don’t expect you to remember these specific errors, since you’ve already said that you still struggle with this... But do you think that nowadays you could have said this again? “Un poblado de 800 personas que es separado solo por un cerro” (a town of 800 people that is separated only by a hill).ARE1: No, I think that was a one-time mistake.I: OK.ARE1: Because, in fact, I think I use “está” more than “es.”I: OK, perfect.ARE1: And now that I think about it, “está” seems more logical to me.I: Okay, okay, very good.ARE1: Yes.I: The other one I wanted to look at… Ah, this mistake interests me not so much because of you, but because there is another student I interviewed, whose first language is also German, and this is something he gets wrong a lot. I’m curious if it has something to do with German or if it’s just... The difference between “este” and “ese”.ARE1: (Nods.)I: Let’s see, here… Because you only got it wrong once, and then it’s used correctly five more times in Tasks 3 and 4. And in the case where it appears as an error... It’s also here, in Task 2. Here: “ese territorio que queda en la esquina nororiental de Austria” (that territory located in the northeastern region of Austria). So, in this case, it should be “este,” because you had just mentioned it immediately before in the discourse.ARE1: Yes.I: Do you think that, because of German…? I don’t speak German, so that’s why I’m asking... Could it be that in German you would say “ese” instead of “este,” and that’s why it causes confusion? Or is it a mistake that has nothing to do with...?ARE1: (Thinks.) Let me think for a moment.I: OK. Yes, yes.ARE1: It’s just that in German we don’t differentiate between “este” and “ese.”I: OK.ARE1: We have more like “este” and “aquel,” which would be a bit further away, perhaps, but no... The difference between “este” and “ese” doesn’t exist.I: And, in discourse, for example, when you refer to something you just mentioned or something you said a while ago... I mean, earlier in the text... Would you also use “aquel,” for example?ARE1: Sorry, can you repeat that?I: Yes, yes. So, in Spanish, when we refer to previous sentences, but we don’t want to repeat them as a whole, if it’s the sentence immediately before, like in this case, we use “este.” And if it is a sentence from two or three sentences ago, we can say “ese” or “aquel”.ARE1: (Nods.)I: Do these kinds of distinctions also exist in discourse... in German, or not?ARE1: Yes, yes, yes, they do.I: Okay, perfect. Alright. There was also… Ah, this error interests me. I gave you two types of feedback and you fixed it. Let’s see… This is in Task 2, and it’s the word “aún.” Okay, here I didn’t correct it, I left it as it was, and here I gave you the correct form and added a small comment that “aun” without an accent means “incluso,” and “aún” with an accent means “todavía.” And then, in Task 4… Let’s see… “Nadie sabía muy bien”… In Task 4, which is this one here, you used it correctly: “el tráfico aún con más precisión.” Do you know if this distinction has been clear to you for a while? Or do you think it was because of...?ARE1: No. That was definitely because of the feedback.I: OK. And is it something that has stayed with you?ARE1: Yes.I: Do you keep it in mind?ARE1: Yes, yes, yes.I: Ah, very good.ARE1: The other day I used “aún” with an accent, and I always remember that “todavía” also has an accent, so when it means “todavía,” it needs an accent. (Laughs.)I: Ah, what a great rule! I’m going to use that for my students too. (Laughs.) That’s great. OK, perfect. So, in this case, do you think that if I hadn’t added this comment and had only added the accent mark, you would have understood why? I mean, would you have remembered it until now?ARE1: No, not if I hadn’t looked it up on my own, no.I: And do you think you would have? Because in the questionnaire, you said that you do usually look for additional information about the mistakes you make. So, do you think you would have looked it up, perhaps?ARE1: I’m not sure, because it doesn’t seem like a very important mistake to me, so to speak.I: Yes, yes, yes.ARE1: Like… It’s not something I was always wondering about or… I didn’t see it as relevant.I: Right. I understand, yes.ARE1: And maybe I forgot, and that’s why I didn’t write it. So, no…I: Right, yes, that too. Okay, so out of the repeated mistakes, I’m very interested in this one: “intentar a encontrar una solución” (try to find a solution). This is in Task 1 and is repeated in Task 2. Okay. So, in Task 1… I think this must be a calque from English, or maybe also from German. Let’s see, here, you wrote: “mientras en grupos de pocas personas se puede hablar sobre el asunto e intentar a encontrar” (while in small groups you can talk about the issue and try to find)... Right? This preposition seems like “try to.” I’m not sure if German also uses a preposition. And I simply crossed it out, with no further mention. And then we have “continuar a,” I think. Let’s see… No.ARE1: Ah, in Task 1…I: Ah, here, here it is. Right here: “continuar a” (continue to). Well, it’s not the same verb, but it seems like a similar type of mistake to me.ARE1: (Nods.)I: Do you remember if you sometimes do this, like adding a preposition after “intentar”? Or do you think it was something...? Here, look: “continuaban a caer” (continued to fall).ARE1: Yes.I: And why do you think you do it? Do you think it’s because of English, or German?ARE1: There’s something similar in German too, but I’m not sure if maybe I do it because of the variety of Spanish I learned... I don’t know if it’s more Latin American, or if it’s used more, even if it’s wrong… If it’s used that way.I: So, in Costa Rica, do they say “intentar a hacer algo” (try to do something)?ARE1: I’m not really sure, but it might be. I imagine it could be something like that.I: OK.ARE1: But I’m not certain…I: Well, it could be, ARE1. It happens to me a lot that I correct something, and then it turns out that there’s a variety where it’s actually said that way. I’ll check, and it might be something like that. Anyway, would it be “continuar a” or “intentar a” with a verb? I mean, would the expression be like, “continuó a llover”? Does that sound familiar to you?ARE1: “Continuar llover” or…?I: “A llover”.ARE1: “Continuar a llover”… (Thinks.) It seems clearer with “intentar,” “intentar a hacer algo”.I: OK, “intentar a hacer algo”.ARE1: That “continuar”… (Shakes head.)I: Why do you think this specific error, not “intentar,” but this one, happened twice… “continuar a caer”?ARE1: Yeah. That might be because of German.I: OK. Interesting. Alright. We’ve looked at this one… Ah, interesting! I didn’t know you repeated this one. And where was it repeated, let’s see? “Afectados”… Ah, okay. But you didn’t repeat exactly the same one, rather… Here I think you’re going to say that in German it’s a single word, right? “Expertos en construcción” (construction experts).ARE1: Aha. (Nods.) Yes.I: OK. So, just out of curiosity: when that single word is formed, is the preposition included? Or is there no preposition at all?ARE1: None. It’s just one word.I: Okay. So, the fact that you included “de” is because many times when it’s a single word in German, the translation into Spanish would include “de”?ARE1: Aha. Exactly.I: And so you do… Okay, okay.ARE1: Yes.I: And I think that…ARE1: Also, a translation professor once told me that in Spanish, when German speakers use “en” (in), it often should be “de” (of) in Spanish. But that was after this essay, so I’m not sure if maybe today I would think about it because of what she said.I: Ah, very good. How interesting! Okay.ARE1: Because I made… I made that mistake many times, using “en” instead of “de,” and here it’s the other way around, so I’m not sure…I: Very good. That’s a very interesting point! Okay, okay. So, that’s everything regarding specific mistakes in your essays, and now what I’d like to review... Well, I think... Normally, what I’ve done in... Are you there, ARE1?ARE1: Yes.I: It’s just… Okay. (Laughs.) Since I can’t see you…ARE1: Ah, of course. (Laughs.)I: Since I can’t see you, so you don’t get caught in the loop, if I don’t hear…ARE1: I’ll make a sound every 10 seconds. (Laughs.)I: (Laughs.) What I’ve done in the other interviews, usually, is delve deeper into the importance placed on receiving feedback and all that, but you already wrote a lot of comments... I mean, very in-depth ones. Yes, here you talked about this... You’re absolutely right. It’s very, very important to give feedback promptly so it can be used afterward. Of course. And it helped you more... Okay, here you say this: the feedback helped you more with words and phrases, and to sound more idiomatic. And this surprises me, I mean, it makes me happy, but it surprises me because most people have said that it helps with spelling, grammatical errors, and things like that... So, why do you think it helps you specifically with this type of mistake, which are the hardest to correct?ARE1: Because…I: Do you think…ARE1: … Maybe…I: Go ahead, sorry.ARE1: Maybe it has to do with how I learned Spanish, by speaking and internalizing the grammar more or less. And also, grammar doesn’t give me much trouble. In any language, grammar and spelling don’t challenge me that much. But what I do struggle with is vocabulary, because even in German, I don’t tend to speak with very sophisticated words, I don’t know. So, well...I: And do you think that…?ARE1: I don’t express myself very well, or I don’t usually express myself very well. And that’s why I guess that’s what helped me the most.I: Do you think it’s because of the type of feedback? I mean, the way you’ve received feedback in general. As a student, not focusing on my course, but in general, out of the formats we’ve seen, which ones are familiar to you? What type of feedback do you usually receive when studying a language?ARE1: From those types?I: Or, well, maybe none of these. (Shows them.)ARE1: I’d say the first one is the most common.I: OK. And with a comment like this? Obviously, just comments alone don’t exist, because no one has that much time, but these are like exaggerations of each type to make the concept clear. Have you received this type several times?ARE1: Yes, but mostly only in Spain.I: Ah, interesting.ARE1: Aha.I: And in Austria? What type? Is it usually the direct feedback we saw at the beginning, or one of these?ARE1: Yes. Something like that, similar, we did as a classroom task. Like, we had to correct our own mistakes.I: Okay, and were they shown to you like this or underlined?ARE1: Well, underlined or also… When it was about a specific phenomenon, like… More focused.I: Ah, okay. So, when it was a specific phenomenon, they wouldn’t indicate anything. They would just show you the fragment where the mistake was, and then you had to think about it.ARE1: Yes. Aha.I: Okay, perfect. And this format with symbols? Have they used it with you before, or…?ARE1: Yes, also. Aha. Yes, yes, yes.I: Okay. And like this, with questions?ARE1: Occasionally, but not much. No.I: Okay, okay.ARE1: Maybe once or twice.I: And this reformulation?ARE1: Not to that extent, but, for example, if it’s just one sentence, then yes.I: Okay, very good. Perfect. And so you said the most common one you’ve received is the one that gives the correction directly.ARE1: (Nods.)I: Okay, okay. So I can understand how that would help you become more idiomatic, since they directly tell you how. Okay, and, then… Let’s see. You said you don’t have a problem asking for clarification, that you usually look up additional information, that you take notes… This was also mentioned by the student whose first language is German. I think it’s like an academic habit in German-speaking countries because making lists seems to be quite common.ARE1: Yeah. (Laughs.) How interesting.I: But I think it’s effective because, honestly, German-speaking students tend to have a very advanced vocabulary.ARE1: Oh, really?I: Yes. OK, you reread the feedback, find it useful, important, and are satisfied... Okay, so the last thing I’ll bother you with is that, besides the mistakes and the type of feedback I gave in the essays, I also looked at complexity measures, like the frequency of vocabulary at each level and vocabulary diversity. And I analyzed this automatically. So, I’m a bit curious as to why you think this might be. Could it be due to the genre of the text, or do you recall anything about the writing process of these essays? Because throughout... In the progression of the four tasks, your mistakes decrease significantly in number, but there isn’t a progression where the vocabulary becomes increasingly difficult or more varied. So, for...ARE1: (Nods.)I: According to the analysis, the essay with the most complex and varied vocabulary is the second one, which is the descriptive text you wrote about the small town in Austria. Here you have… I mean, there’s quite a difference. It’s the one with the most diverse vocabulary.ARE1: (Nods.)I: I’m curious: does this match your impression that maybe you spent more time on this essay or…?ARE1: Yes, a lot more time.I: Well, it shows in the result, doesn’t it?ARE1: Good, that’s good to hear. (Laughs.)I: Okay, so how did you approach writing this essay? What did you do differently? Was it just the time, or was there something else? Whatever you can remember, of course.ARE1: It’s the time, but also... I think in another class, they mentioned that in Spanish, you shouldn’t repeat words; it requires a lot of vocabulary diversity. And maybe I kept that in mind, and I also remember that with this essay, I started expanding my vocabulary lists, which I always make in Excel...I: Ah, very good.ARE1: And I began adding synonyms or similar words, like, instead of “tormenta,” what else can be used? And so on.I: How interesting!ARE1: I looked up a lot.I: And then do you still use these Excel lists now, in your later essays?ARE1: Yes, yes.I: Very good.ARE1: The truth is… The problem is that I already have so many, and I don’t go back to them as often as I should. I mean, if I did, it would be even more effective, obviously, but…I: I’m really interested in this. Do you organize them by theme? Alphabetically? How does it work?ARE1: Thematically. In the course we had with you, I organized them by... I think by essays, more or less, and I still do it that way, by essays or sometimes by themes.I: And do you keep… Do you keep just the word? Or do you also save an example in a sentence, for example?ARE1: It depends. It depends.I: So, if it has a usage that isn’t intuitive for you, you include an example, and, if not…ARE1: Exactly.I: Okay, very good. How interesting! Okay. But, of course, they explained this to you, and this was the second task… And, for example, in the fourth one, why do you think there isn’t as much diversity or complex vocabulary?ARE1: Because I didn’t spend much time on it. (Laughs.)I: Okay, okay. And do you think it could also have something to do with the genre? That it’s more like a... This one is a narrative text, the previous one is a very detailed descriptive text...ARE1: (Nods.)I: And this piece is much shorter, and since it revolves around the scene from The Intouchables, which talks a lot about cars and all that, which is pretty simple automotive vocabulary, could that also be the reason?ARE1: (Nods.)I: Okay, agreed. So… Do you think that even though you spent less time on this essay, so there isn’t a clear progression… Do you believe that over time, the feedback did contribute in some way to improving your vocabulary?ARE1: Yes, I think so.I: Okay, okay. Well, I think I don’t have to bother you with anything else. Let me check my list just in case… Ah, yeah! I wanted to ask you… If you had to choose between working recursively on the same text, like, for example, with the type of feedback that you’ve already said would require additional feedback from the teacher because you’d have to first work on finding the errors, and then they would need to be checked to make sure you found them correctly… If you had to choose between doing this process or writing more texts and getting the solutions directly in each case… Because here, there’s a trade-off, since class time is limited... Would you prefer to do fewer texts, but work on them over more rounds, or do more texts but without this exercise of finding the errors yourself?ARE1: Oof… (Laughs.) It makes a lot of sense to work on the same text thoroughly and in depth, but it also depends on the text, because if in that text, I didn’t make many mistakes, or… Yes, it really depends on the text.I: Of course.ARE1: Maybe, ideally… Do I have to choose, or can I propose another solution, perhaps? (Laughs.)I: Sure, you can propose whatever you want.ARE1: Because, for example, I think the best thing for me would be to work thoroughly on a well-chosen, well-thought-out text, and… But at the same time, also write more texts to be able to use more vocabulary and also…I: And these…ARE1: … Avoid repeating the mistakes in a different context, because after working on the same text several times, I already know it pretty well, I suppose, and, yes, for the sake of variety.I: Right. And… Sorry for interrupting you so much… It’s just that since I can’t see you, I don’t have the visual cue to know if you’ve finished or not. What I was going to say is: and these texts that you would work on at the same time… In those, would you want the correction to be direct?ARE1: I think so.I: Okay. Because I also think, like you, that it’s very useful to work on the same text, but the times I’ve been able to do it in class, I’ve had two problems: either the students didn’t do the work of finding the mistakes, or they later complained that they got too tired of always working on the same text. So, I’m in a bit of a dilemma, not sure what the best solution might be. What some other students have suggested, and which you also mentioned some teachers have done before, is to do this error-finding exercise as a classroom activity instead of homework. I don’t know, what do you think?ARE1: About doing it as a class exercise?I: Right, instead of giving you four essays as homework… Instead of assigning revisions of the same essay as homework, doing a revision in class this way, and then assigning new essays as homework.ARE1: In my case, I always need a lot of time to do it, and I also get distracted easily. So I might end up thinking about something else, like… Another issue related to Spanish, but not that specific error, so I’m not sure if I could do it as well as I’d like in class. But, on the other hand (“al otro lado”)… No, on the other hand (“por otro lado”)… On the other hand… (Laughs.) On the other hand, for example, if we worked… Should it be “trabajáramos”? Worked in pairs…I: “Trabajáramos.”ARE1: If we worked in pairs, that could also help.I: That’s true, yes.ARE1: To make more connections and… Yes.I: It’s true.ARE1: I don’t have a clear answer, sorry. (Laughs.)I: Well, that’s why I’m writing the article, ARE1, neither do I. (Laughs.)ARE1: I’ll read it afterwards. (Laughs.)I: So… Okay, and lastly, is there any feedback you’ve ever received—not the entire feedback on an essay, but something specific that someone told you in an essay that has always stuck with you? Something you always remember when you’re writing?ARE1: Well, that, what I mentioned earlier about “de” and “en.” And I remember the example we were working on… Sorry, translating an article from German to Spanish, and there was something like: “El…” No, how was it? “Un pueblo en”… “Un pueblo en España” (a town in Spain), something like that, and it should have been “un pueblo de España” (a town of Spain) or “los pueblos de España” (the towns of Spain).I: Yes. I understand the mistake, yes.ARE1: Yes, that.I: It’s like… This is something English speakers also do a lot… It’s like saying, “ve al parque en tu ciudad” (go to the park in your city), for example…ARE1: Yes.I: … Instead of “ve al parque de tu ciudad”.ARE1: Exactly, that’s it.I: Yes, yes, yes. And what do you think made that feedback so memorable for you?ARE1: Well, it was something I always did or tended to do.I: So, it seemed relevant to you.ARE1: Yes. Yes, because it’s something that happens multiple times, and something that… I don’t know, it’s not a one-time thing.I: OK.ARE1: It’s more… It’s more specific.I: Yes, I understand. OK, well now… There you are. I’m going to stop the recording… Here.
POST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH ARE1Original transcript in SpanishI: Bueno, probamos así. A ver si nos funciona. A ver, la parte que más me interesa es la última del cuestionario, de momento, que era la que mostraba distintos tipos de feedback. Sobre esta parte no te voy a hacer preguntas en concreto, porque tú dejaste ya unos comentarios muy, muy detallados, pero sí que te lo... Para que tú te acuerdes de qué tipos de feedback habíamos estado mirando… Teníamos este, que simplemente es tachar y poner la respuesta correcta.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Que, sobre este, dijiste que te parecía muy claro, pero que podía... O sea, según el tipo de error, podía ser necesario incluir algún ejemplo, sobre todo si era un error que se repetía mucho, para que se pudiese de verdad aplicar este feedback. El segundo tipo de feedback era, pues, también dar la solución, pero además añadir una explicación debajo.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Y, sobre este tipo de feedback, pues… Dijiste como la parte complementaria: que para errores difíciles es muy útil, pero quizá para corregir una tilde, por ejemplo, no hace falta añadir tanto ruido de fondo añadiendo explicaciones, sobre todo si el nivel es avanzado. Vale, el tercer tipo consistía en solo indicar, pues… En esta línea hay tres errores, en esta línea hay dos… Y no explicar ni dónde están exactamente, ni en qué consisten. Y este fue uno de los que menos te gustó: te pareció poco claro y poco útil, porque, además, como los errores son de distinto tipo, pues… El estudiante no sabe en qué enfocarse. El cuarto tipo de feedback que diste, o sea, perdón… sobre el que os preguntaba, era este, que consiste en subrayar dónde está el error sin indicar cuál es la solución, para que el estudiante, pues… Lo busque. Y te pareció este un poco mejor que el anterior, que no indicaba nada, pero aún considerabas que faltaba dar alguna pista más al estudiante… Alguna guía más para poder solucionar los problemas. El quinto tipo de feedback era este, que también es subrayar, pero añadiendo la pista de si es un error de vocabulario o es un error de gramática… Y este te pareció muy útil, por ejemplo, para identificar áreas de mejora, ¿no? Si los errores son la mayoría de gramática, pues… Ves que ahí es donde está en lo que deberías trabajar. Pero también requiere mucha inversión de tiempo dedicarse a buscar tú mismo la solución y, luego, además, requiere retroalimentación adicional por parte del profesor. El sexto y penúltimo tipo de feedback consiste en dar pistas metalingüísticas, en forma de pregunta, para que el estudiante reflexione sobre cuál puede ser el error. Y sobre este dijiste algo similar a lo anterior: que requiere inversión de tiempo y segunda revisión por parte del profesor, y que es útil la reflexión, pero que también requiere, pues… Eso, mucho trabajo y también conocimiento metalingüístico por parte del estudiante. Y ya el último tipo consiste en, a través de… O sea, a partir del fragmento del estudiante, reformular todo este fragmento como ofreciendo un modelo que mantiene el mensaje, pero ha arreglado, o ha cambiado, todas las frases para que sean más idiomáticas. Y este también fue uno de los que menos te gustó, porque considerabas que podía servir como modelo antes de la tarea, pero que después no ayuda al estudiante a mejorar su texto. Hasta aquí, ¿más o menos te suena un poco todo? ¿Te parece que sigues teniendo las mismas opiniones?ARE1: Sí. Sí, sí, sí.I: Vale, perfecto. Vale, entonces pasamos ahora a hablar sobre tus redacciones. Entonces, a ver… Aquí… Esto no espero que lo veas, ¿eh? Esto solo son documentos para mí.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: A ver… Aquí estaría… Esto debería ser más pequeño. Lo voy a poner así. Ah, claro… Porque, al hacer grande el cuestionario, se me ha hecho grande esto también. A ver… Vale. Entonces, bueno… Yo he mirado las redacciones de todos, y te explico un poquito… Yo me he centrado sobre todo en errores de vocabulario, lo que pasa es que, como también he mirado la combinación de palabras, pues… A veces, en esta combinación también hay errores con preposiciones o con artículos, pero siempre es en relación con una expresión completa de vocabulario.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Entonces, la mayoría de los errores que has cometido tú son de sustitución, que consiste en tomar una palabra que existe en el español, pero en un contexto que no acaba de funcionar. Y, de hecho, en el resto de áreas que he mirado, hay muy poquitos errores. O sea, la mayoría son así, de sustitución.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Entonces, de estos errores, los que más arreglaste eran precisamente los que eran más gramaticales. O sea, con artículos, con preposiciones y con ortografía, pero, claro, esto no quiere decir que el feedback sobre sustitución no sirviese, sino que… Claro, al ser redacciones diferentes, vas a usar un vocabulario u otro en función del tema. Entonces, hay errores que no he podido ver si se han arreglado o no, porque no han vuelto a aparecer en la redacción posterior.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: No ha habido ningún error que hayas arreglado mal… O sea, porque también he mirado si se intentaba aplicar la corrección, pero seguía siendo no exitosa… Y has repetido algunos errores también con determinantes y preposiciones. Entonces, lo que quiero ver es, primero de todo… La mayoría de correcciones que parece que han funcionado son las dos primeras, que además son las que a ti más te habían gustado, que son indicar directamente la solución o indicar la solución con un comentario. Entonces, vamos a mirar, por ejemplo, este error de aquí: “por otro lado”. Vale, aquí está. Y este lo cometiste en la primera redacción y lo arreglaste en la tercera. Vale, ahora sí que me interesa que puedas ver, así que indícame de qué tamaño te pongo esto. A ver… ¿Así?ARE1: Sí, así está bien.I: Vale, perfecto. Pues aquí… Vale, aquí, por ejemplo, con este conector, escribiste “al otro lado”. Y yo te lo taché y te puse “por otro lado”. Y, entonces, luego tú, en la redacción 3… En esta me va a costar encontrarlo, porque no puedo buscar directamente…ARE1: (Ríe.)I: A ver, “por otro lado” debería estar…ARE1: Aquí está, en el segundo… No, sí, segundo párrafo.I: ¿Sí? ¿Al principio o hacia el final?ARE1: “Naciones”… Hacia el final. “Naciones periféricas”, y después dice “por otro lado”, no sé si lo puedes ver. (Ríe.)I: A ver, “naciones periféricas”… Ah, vale, vale. Ah, aquí. Aquí, vale. Sí, sí, sí. Aquí está, vale, sí. Este “por otro lado”. Entonces, claro, la pregunta sería: ¿tú crees que a ti te pudo quedar, del simple hecho de que yo te tachase aquí un “al” por un “por”, que esta era la forma del conector y por eso lo aplicaste? ¿O crees que quizá este error de “al otro lado” era una cosa puntual, porque tú ya sabías que esto era de esta manera?ARE1: Creo que tenía cierta incerteza en cuanto a eso. Como… Si existía el “al otro lado” o si siempre era “por otro lado”.I: (Asiente.) O sea…ARE1: Creo que no era puntual. No creo.I: Vale. O sea, sí que existe la expresión “al otro lado”, pero no se utiliza como conector para ordenar el discurso. O sea, puedes decirle a alguien: “espera al otro lado”…ARE1: Ah, ya, ya.I: Entonces eso sí es correcto, pero, en discursos, sobre todo formales, el conector es “por un lado” y “por el otro lado”.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Vale.ARE1: Claro, si se trata de una ubicación ahí si puedes usar “al otro lado”.I: Exacto. Exactamente.ARE1: Ya, ya. Ah, entonces supongo que fue eso, que conocía las dos expresiones, pero no sabía muy bien utilizarlas en el contexto adecuado. Ajá.I: (Asiente.) Entonces, ¿tú crees que, por ejemplo, el hecho de que aquí, en la tercera redacción, usases “por el otro lado” pudo ser porque habías mirado el feedback? ¿O estabas simplemente probando en un caso y en el otro lo que te salía?ARE1: No, yo creo que sí fue el feedback.I: Vale. Genial. No encuentro el cursor. A ver… ¿Dónde…? Aquí está. Ay, pero no lo veo… ¿Desaparece cuando lo...? Ah, vale, ya está, ya lo veo, perdóname. (Ríe.)ARE1: No. (Ríe.)I: No, no, pero no… No me está… Aquí. Eso, que quería cambiar de aplicación… Vale, otro que me interesa mucho es este: “los afectados de/por un crimen”. “Afectados”… Aquí. ¿Es este? Sí. Vale, y esto fue en la primera redacción, creo. Sí. Y lo solucionaste… Por ejemplo, en la segunda está solucionado. Vale. “Afectados”… Vale, aquí, por ejemplo. “Los afectados de un crimen”… Con “afectado”, la preposición es “por”. Y yo no te di ninguna explicación, solo lo taché y lo escribí aquí. Y, entonces, tú, en el texto descriptivo, aquí, hablaste: “fue una de las más afectadas por el pedrisco”. Aquí esto aparece arreglado. Entonces, nuevamente, la pregunta es: ¿tú crees que tiene algo que ver con feedback? ¿O es algo que tú normalmente quizá ya usabas esta preposición y en el caso anterior había sido un lapsus?ARE1: Buena pregunta. (Piensa y ríe.)I: (Ríe.) En el otro caso habías puesto “afectados de un crimen”.ARE1: Ajá. Es un poco raro, porque, en este contexto, no me parece mal el “por”, pero en el otro contexto creo que sí hubiera escrito, hoy mismo, “los afectados de”. Ajá. No estoy segura, pero creo que sí. (Ríe.)I: No, me parece muy interesante, ¿eh? Sí, sí. Vale, y crees que si, en vez de… Por ejemplo, en este caso, solo te lo taché y te puse la preposición. Si te hubiera añadido un comentario como “con ‘afectados’, cuando expresamos la causa, o sea, lo que afecta, usamos ‘por’”… Como el caso del segundo tipo de feedback que te había mostrado, ¿crees que te habría quedado a largo plazo?ARE1: (Piensa.) Tal vez sí. Ahora lo estoy mirando y pienso que es algo del alemán.I: Ah, puede ser.ARE1: Sí, porque en alemán sería “los afectados de un crimen”. Bueno, “de un crimen” sería una… ¿Cómo se llama?I: Un calco.ARE1: Sí, o sea, una palabra, un sustantivo.I: Ah, vale, vale.ARE1: Y en la otra frase no sería una palabra.I: Aquí: “las más afectadas por el pedrisco”.ARE1: Ajá.I: Ah, ¡pues qué interesante!ARE1: Creo que sí es por eso.I: Pues sí, sí, sí. Muy interesante. A ver… Vale, aquí vamos a mirar este, que es un error de sustitución, como te comentaba en otro caso, que es la distinción entre el “ser” y el “estar”.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Que, obviamente, este tipo de errores, que son de pasados o de “ser” y “estar”, no se solucionan con un feedback una vez. Eso no… Es lógico.ARE1: Lo sigo haciendo mal, creo. (Ríe.)I: Bueno, pero porque eso, es que de verdad, como… Esto es como cuando un español aprende alemán: los artículos siempre… Si son palabras poco usuales, siempre seguirá fallándolos, aunque tenga un nivel superavanzado.ARE1: Ya.I: A ver, esto fue en la redacción 1 y en la 3 aparece dos veces. “Está separado” y “estar conectado” y “estar involucrado”. Vale… Redacción 2… “Es separado”. Vale, la dos es esta. Vale, aquí. “Entre ellas, el vecindario… Un poblado de 800 personas que es separado”, habías puesto. Y sería “está separado”. Y, luego, en la tercera redacción, sí que utilizas “estar conectado” y “estar involucrado”. Entonces, en este… O sea, no espero que recuerdes estos errores en concreto, pero, este tema del “ser” y el “estar” con adjetivo has dicho ya que lo sigues fallando. ¿Crees que hoy en día habrías podido decir otra vez esto? “Un poblado de 800 personas que es separado solo por un cerro”.ARE1: No, yo creo que eso fue puntual.I: Vale.ARE1: Porque, de hecho, creo que uso más “está” que “es”.I: Vale, perfecto.ARE1: Y ahora que lo pienso me parece más lógico “está”.I: Vale, vale, muy bien.ARE1: Sí.I: El otro que quería mirar… Ah, este error me interesa no tanto por ti, sino porque hay otro estudiante al que he entrevistado, que también tiene como primera lengua el alemán, y esto es algo que falla mucho, y me da curiosidad si esto tiene algo que ver con el alemán o simplemente… Que es la diferencia entre “este” y “ese”.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: A ver, aquí… Porque tú solo lo has fallado una vez y luego aparece bien utilizado cinco veces más en las redacciones 3 y 4. Y en la que aparece como error… Es también aquí, en la segunda redacción. Aquí: “ese territorio que queda en la esquina nororiental de Austria”. O sea, en este caso, tendría que ser “este”, porque lo acabas de mencionar inmediatamente antes en el discurso.ARE1: Sí.I: ¿Te parece que, por el alemán…? Yo no hablo alemán, ¿eh? Por eso te pregunto… ¿Puede ser que esto en alemán se diría “ese”, en vez de “este”, y por eso se presta a confusión? ¿O es un error que no tiene nada que ver con…? ARE1: (Piensa.) Déjame pensar un momento.I: Vale. Sí, sí.ARE1: Es que en alemán no diferenciamos entre “ese” y “este”.I: Vale.ARE1: Tenemos más bien “este” y “aquel”, que sería un poco más lejos, tal vez, pero no… La diferencia entre “este” y “ese” no existe.I: Y, dentro de discursos, por ejemplo, cuando hacéis referencia a algo que se acaba de decir o a algo que se dijo hace más tiempo… O sea, más arriba… ¿También utilizaríais “aquel”, por ejemplo?ARE1: Perdón, ¿lo puedes repetir?I: Sí, sí. O sea, en español, cuando hacemos referencia a frases que hemos dicho antes, pero no queremos repetir toda la frase, si es la frase inmediatamente anterior, como en este caso, decimos “este”. Y si es una frase que hace, no sé, dos o tres frases que hemos dicho, podemos decir “ese” o “aquel”.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Este tipo de distancias también en discurso… También se hacen en alemán, ¿o no?ARE1: Sí, sí, sí, también.I: Vale, perfecto. Vale. Había también… Ah, este error me interesa. Te di dos tipos de feedback y lo arreglaste. A ver… Esto es en la redacción 2, que es el “aún”. Vale, aquí no te lo corregí, lo dejé así, y aquí te puse la solución y te puse un pequeño comentario de que “aun” sin acento significa “incluso”, y “aún” con acento significa “todavía”. Y, luego, tú en la redacción… A ver… “Nadie sabía muy bien”… En la redacción 4, que es esta de aquí, me lo pusiste bien ya: “el tráfico aún con más precisión”. ¿Esta distinción sabes si hace tiempo que la tienes presente? ¿O crees que fue por…?ARE1: No. Eso seguramente fue por el feedback.I: Vale. ¿Y es algo que haya quedado contigo?ARE1: Sí.I: ¿Lo tienes presente?ARE1: Sí, sí, sí.I: Ah, muy bien.ARE1: El otro día lo utilicé, el “aún” con tilde, y siempre recuerdo que “todavía” también tiene tilde, así que cuando significa “todavía” es con tilde. (Ríe.)I: ¡Ah, qué buena regla! La voy a utilizar también para los estudiantes. (Ríe.) Qué bien. Vale, perfecto. Entonces, en este caso, ¿tú crees que si yo no te hubiera puesto este comentario y solo te hubiese puesto una tilde tú habrías entendido por qué? O sea, ¿lo habrías recordado hasta hoy?ARE1: No, si no lo hubiera mirado yo por mi propia cuenta, no.I: ¿Y crees que lo habrías hecho? Porque tú en el cuestionario dijiste que sí que sueles buscar información adicional sobre los errores que cometes. Entonces, ¿crees que lo habrías buscado, quizás?ARE1: No estoy segura, porque no me parece un error muy importante, por decirlo así.I: Sí, sí, sí.ARE1: Como… No es algo que siempre me preguntaba o… No lo veía tan relevante.I: Claro. Entiendo, sí.ARE1: Y, a lo mejor se me olvidó, y por eso no lo puse. Así que no…I: Claro, sí, también. Vale, y entonces, de los errores repetidos, me interesa mucho este: “intentar a encontrar una solución”. Que este está en la redacción 1 y se repite en la 2, vale. Entonces, en la redacción 1… Yo creo que esto debe de ser un calco del inglés, o quizás también del alemán. A ver, aquí, que pones: “mientras en grupos de pocas personas se puede hablar sobre el asunto e intentar a encontrar”, ¿no? Esta preposición parece como “try to”. No sé si en alemán también va una preposición. Y yo simplemente lo taché, sin más mención que esta. Y, entonces, luego tenemos “continuar a”, me parece. A ver… No.ARE1: Ah, en la primera…I: Ah, aquí, aquí está. Justo aquí: “continuar a”. Que, bueno, no es el mismo verbo, pero a mí me resulta como un tipo de error similar.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: ¿Te suena que a veces hagas esto de “intentar a”… Añadir la preposición? ¿O crees que fue algo…? Aquí, mira: “continuaban a caer”.ARE1: Sí.I: ¿Y por qué crees que lo haces? ¿Crees que es por el inglés, por el alemán?ARE1: También hay algo parecido en alemán, pero no sé si tal vez lo hago por mi variedad del español que aprendí… No sé si es más latinoamericano, o si se utiliza más, aunque esté mal… Si se utiliza así.I: O sea, ¿en Costa Rica dicen “intentar a hacer algo”?ARE1: No lo sé muy bien, pero puede que sí. Me imagino que podría ser algo así.I: Vale.ARE1: Pero tampoco estoy segura…I: Bueno, podría ser ¿eh, ARE1? Es que me pasa muchísimo que corrijo cosas y luego siempre existe una variedad donde eso sí justamente se dice. Lo voy a consultar y puede ser que sea algo así. De todos modos, o sea, ¿sería “continuar a” o “intentar a” con verbo? O sea, ¿sería la expresión así, “continuó a llover”, que te suena familiar?ARE1: ¿“Continuar llover” o…?I: “A llover”.ARE1: “Continuar a llover”… (Piensa.) Me parece más claro con “intentar”, “intentar a hacer algo”.I: Vale, “intentar a hacer algo”.ARE1: Eso de “continuar”… (Niega con la cabeza.)I: ¿A que te…? O sea, ¿por qué crees que este error en concreto, no el “intentar”, sino este, se produjo y además dos veces… “continuar a caer”?ARE1: Ya. Esto tal vez sí por el alemán.I: Vale. Interesante. Okey. Este lo hemos mirado… ¡Ah, interesante! No sabía que también lo habías repetido. ¿Y este dónde está repetido, a ver? “Afectados”… Ah, vale. Pero no has repetido exactamente el mismo, sino que has repetido… Aquí creo que me vas a decir lo del alemán que debe ser una única palabra, ¿no? “Expertos en construcción”.ARE1: Ajá. (Asiente.) Sí.I: Vale. Y, entonces, solo como curiosidad: cuando se forma esta única palabra, ¿se pone esta preposición? ¿O no se pone ninguna preposición?ARE1: Ninguna. Es una palabra.I: Vale. Y, entonces, ¿el hecho de poner el “de” es porque, muchas de estas veces que en alemán es una única palabra, la traducción al castellano sería con el “de”?ARE1: Ajá. Exacto.I: Y entonces haces… Vale, vale.ARE1: Sí.I: Y me parece que…ARE1: También, una profesora de traducción me dijo que, en el castellano, muchas veces, cuando los que hablamos alemán utilizamos el “en”, en castellano sería “de”. Pero eso fue después de esta redacción, así que no sé si hoy en día a lo mejor lo pensaría por lo que ha dicho ella.I: Ah, muy bien. ¡Qué interesante! Vale.ARE1: Porque yo hice… Cometí ese error muchas veces, de utilizar el “en”, en lugar del “de”, y aquí es al revés, así que no sé…I: Muy bien. ¡Qué interesante este dato! Vale, vale. Vale, entonces, esto es todo en cuanto a errores concretos de tus redacciones y, entonces, lo que me gustaría repasar ahora… Bueno, yo creo que… Normalmente, lo que he hecho en las… ¿Estás ahí, ARE1?ARE1: Sí.I: Es que… Vale. (Ríe.) Como no te veo…ARE1: Ah, claro. (Ríe.)I: Como no te veo para que no te salga el bucle a ti, si no oigo…ARE1: Voy a dar un sonido cada 10 segundos. (Ríe.)I: (Ríe.) Lo que he hecho en las otras entrevistas, normalmente, ha sido profundizar sobre la importancia que se daba al hecho de recibir el feedback y todo esto, pero es que tú me pusiste ya muchos comentarios… O sea, más profundos. Sí, aquí hablaste de este tema… Tienes toda la razón. Lo que dices es verdad: es muy, muy importante dar el feedback pronto, para que se pueda utilizar después. Claro. Y te ayudó más… Vale, aquí dices esto: te ha ayudado el feedback más a nivel de palabras y frases, y a sonar más idiomática. Y esto me sorprende, o sea, me alegra mucho, pero me sorprende, porque la mayoría de gente ha respondido que ayuda… Pues eso, con ortografía, con errores gramaticales… Entonces, ¿por qué crees que a ti te ayuda justo en este tipo de errores que son los más difíciles de arreglar?ARE1: Porque…I: O sea, crees…ARE1: … Tal vez…I: Dime, dime, perdón.ARE1: Tal vez tiene que ver con la manera de que aprendí el español, hablando e internalizando ya la gramática más o menos. Y, también, no me cuesta la gramática. En cualquier idioma no me cuesta tanto, ni ortografía. Pero lo que sí me cuesta es el vocabulario, porque hasta en alemán no suelo hablar con palabras muy sofisticadas, no sé. Y así que, pues…I: ¿Y crees que…?ARE1: No me sé expresar tan bien, o no me suelo expresar tan bien. Y por eso supongo que eso es lo que más me ayudó.I: ¿Y crees que es por la forma del feedback? O sea, la forma en la que has recibido el feedback, en general. Porque, o sea, tú como estudiante, no centrándote en mi asignatura, sino en general, de los formatos que hemos visto, ¿cuáles te resultan familiares? ¿Qué tipo de feedback sueles recibir? Cuando has estudiado lengua.ARE1: ¿De esos tipos?I: O, bueno, quizá no es ninguno de estos. (Los muestra.)ARE1: El primero diría que es lo más común.I: Vale. ¿Y así con comentario? Obviamente, que solo sean comentarios no existe, porque nadie tiene tanto tiempo, pero son como exageraciones de cada tipo para que quede claro cómo es. ¿De este tipo has recibido varias veces?ARE1: Sí, pero casi solo en España.I: Ah, interesante.ARE1: Ajá.I: ¿Y en Austria? ¿Qué tipo? ¿Suele ser el directo que hemos visto al principio o uno de estos?ARE1: Sí. Algo así, parecido, lo hicimos como tarea en clase. Digamos que tuvimos que corregir nuestros mismos errores.I: Vale, ¿y os los enseñaban así o subrayados?ARE1: Bueno, subrayados o también… Cuando se trataba de un fenómeno en concreto, así que… Como ya más enfocado.I: Ah, vale. O sea, cuando era un fenómeno en concreto, no os indicaban nada. Solo os ponían el fragmento donde estaba el error y entonces lo pensabais.ARE1: Sí. Ajá.I: Vale, perfecto. ¿Y este formato así, con símbolos? ¿Te lo han puesto alguna vez o…?ARE1: Sí, también. Ajá. Sí, sí, sí.I: Vale ¿Y así, con preguntas?ARE1: Puntualmente, pero no mucho. No.I: Vale, vale.ARE1: En una ocasión o dos.I: ¿Y esta reformulación?ARE1: Tanto así no, pero, por ejemplo, en una oración, si se trata de una oración nada más, ahí sí.I: Vale, muy bien. Perfecto. Y, entonces, has dicho que el más usual es el que da la corrección directamente, que hayas recibido tú.ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Vale, vale. Entonces sí que puedo entender que te ayude a ser más idiomática, porque ya te dicen cómo. Vale, y, entonces, ya la… ¿A ver? Dijiste eso, que no tienes problema en pedir aclaraciones, que sueles buscar información adicional, que anotas… Esto también lo dijo el chico que tiene como primera lengua alemán. Me parece que es un… Que es como una costumbre académica de los países germánicos, porque el tema de las listas es bastante frecuente.ARE1: Ya. (Ríe.) Qué interesante.I: Pero bueno, yo creo que sirve, porque la verdad es que los estudiantes de habla alemana suelen tener un vocabulario muy avanzado.ARE1: ¿Ah, sí?I: Sí. Vale, la relees y te parece útil, importante, estás satisfecha… Vale, pues, entonces, lo último ya con lo que te voy a molestar es que, aparte de los errores y del tipo de feedback que di en las redacciones, he mirado también cuestiones de complejidad, como la frecuencia de vocabulario de cada nivel y la diversidad del vocabulario. Y esto lo he mirado automáticamente. Entonces, me da cierta curiosidad, a ver por qué crees que puede ser tú, si puede ser por el género del texto, o si recuerdas algo de cómo fue el proceso de escritura de estas redacciones, porque, a lo largo de… En la progresión de las cuatro redacciones, tus errores disminuyen mucho en cantidad, pero no hay una progresión de que el vocabulario sea cada vez más difícil, ni tampoco más variado. O sea, para…ARE1: (Asiente.)I: De acuerdo con el análisis, la redacción con el vocabulario más complejo y más variado es la segunda, que es el texto descriptivo que hiciste sobre el pueblecito de Austria. Que aquí tienes… O sea, es que tienes… Y además es mucha diferencia. Es la que tiene vocabulario más diverso. ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Me da curiosidad: ¿corresponde con tu impresión de que en esta redacción quizá invertiste más tiempo o…?ARE1: Sí, muchísimo más tiempo.I: Bueno, mira, pues se refleja en el resultado, ¿eh?ARE1: Bien, qué bien. (Ríe.)I: Vale, entonces, ¿cómo encaraste la escritura de esta redacción? ¿Qué hiciste diferente? ¿Es solo el tiempo o hiciste algo? Que puedas recordar, claro.ARE1: Es el tiempo, pero también… Yo creo que ahí también… En la otra asignatura, una otra asignatura, nos dijeron que, en castellano, no se repiten palabras, o sea, se requiere muchísima diversidad de vocabulario. Y tal vez tuve en mente eso, y también recuerdo que ahí, con esta redacción, empecé a aumentar mis listas, que siempre las hago en Excel, mis listas de vocabulario…I: Ah, muy bien.ARE1: Y ahí empecé a añadir sinónimos o palabras parecidas, como, en lugar de “tormenta”, ¿qué más se puede utilizar? Y así.I: ¡Qué interesante!ARE1: Busqué muchísimo.I: ¿Y luego sigues usando estas listas de Excel, ahora, en tus redacciones posteriores?ARE1: Sí, sí.I: Muy bien.ARE1: La verdad… El problema es que ya tengo muchas y no las vuelvo a ver tanto, tanto. O sea, si lo haría, fuera aún más efectivo, obviamente, pero…I: Me interesa bastante este tema. ¿Las ordenas temáticamente? ¿Alfabéticamente? ¿Cómo funciona?ARE1: Temáticamente. En esta… En la asignatura que tuvimos contigo, lo hice por… Creo que por redacciones, más o menos, y lo sigo haciendo así, redacciones, o también a veces temas.I: Y guardas… ¿Guardas solo la palabra? ¿O guardas también un ejemplo en una frase, por ejemplo?ARE1: Depende. Depende.I: O sea, si tiene un uso que no es intuitivo para ti, pones un ejemplo, y, si no…ARE1: Exacto.I: Vale, muy bien. ¡Qué interesante! Vale. Y… Pero, claro, a ti te explicaron esto y esta era la segunda redacción… Y, por ejemplo, en la cuarta ¿por qué crees que no hay tanta diversidad, ni un vocabulario tan complejo?ARE1: Porque no invertí mucho tiempo. (Ríe.)I: Vale, vale. ¿Y crees que también puede tener algo que ver el género? Que es más como un… Este es un texto narrativo… El anterior es un texto descriptivo que has detallado mucho…ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Y este texto, pues también es mucho más breve y, además, como explica la escena de Intocable que habla mucho de coches y todo esto, que es vocabulario bastante simple el automovilístico, ¿puede ser quizá por eso también?ARE1: (Asiente.)I: Vale, de acuerdo. Entonces… O sea, ¿tú consideras, a pesar de que en esta redacción, pues… Hayas invertido menos tiempo y, entonces, no sea como una progresión de esta… Crees que, a lo largo del tiempo, sí que el feedback contribuyó de alguna manera a mejorar tu vocabulario?ARE1: Sí, yo creo que sí.I: Vale, vale. Pues yo diría que no tengo que molestarte con nada más. A ver, voy a mirar mi lista por si acaso… ¡Ah, sí! Quería consultarte… Si tuvieras que elegir en una… Si te diesen a elegir entre trabajar recursivamente sobre un mismo texto, como, por ejemplo, con el tipo de feedback que tú misma ya habías dicho que requeriría, pues… feedback adicional por parte del profesor, porque tú tendrías que hacer primero el trabajo de buscar los errores y, entonces, luego tendría que comprobarse que los has buscado bien… Si te diesen a elegir entre hacer este proceso o trabajar… O sea, escribir más textos y que te diesen ya directamente la solución en cada caso… Claro, porque aquí hay que hacer un trade-off, porque el tiempo de la asignatura es el tiempo de la asignatura… ¿Preferirías hacer menos textos, pero trabajarlos en más rondas, o hacer más textos, pero sin este ejercicio de ser tú quien busca los errores?ARE1: Uf… (Ríe.) Tiene mucho sentido trabajar el mismo texto bien y con profundidad, pero también depende del texto, porque, si en ese texto no, no sé, no cometí muchos errores, o no… Sí, depende mucho del texto.I: Claro.ARE1: Tal vez, lo ideal… ¿Tengo que elegir o puedo proponer otra solución, tal vez? (Ríe.)I: Claro, puedes proponer lo que quieras.ARE1: Porque por ejemplo, si… Creo que lo más… Lo mejor para mí sería trabajar bien un texto en profundidad, y un texto bien elegido, bien pensado, y… Pero igual, al lado, escribir más textos para poder utilizar más vocabulario, y también…I: ¿Y estos…?ARE1: … Volver a no cometer los errores en otro contexto, porque, después de trabajar en el mismo texto varias veces, ya lo conozco bastante bien, supongo, y, sí, por la variedad.I: Claro. Y… Perdona, que te interrumpo mucho… Es que, como no te estoy viendo, o sea, no tengo la pista para ver si has terminado o no. Lo que te iba a decir es: ¿y estos textos que trabajarías al lado… En estos sí que querrías que la corrección fuese directa?ARE1: Creo que sí.I: Vale. Claro, es que a mí me… También pienso como tú, que es muy útil trabajar el mismo texto, pero las veces que lo he podido hacer en clase, he tenido dos problemas: o que los estudiantes no hacían el trabajo de buscarlo, o que luego se quejaban de que se habían cansado mucho de estar siempre con el mismo texto. Entonces, estoy ahí, ahí, que no sé cuál podría ser la solución. Lo que han propuesto algunos otros estudiantes, y que además tú has comentado que alguna vez te han hecho algunos profesores, es hacer este ejercicio de buscar los errores como un ejercicio de clase, en vez de hacerlo como si fueran deberes. No sé, ¿qué piensas tú?ARE1: ¿Sobre hacerlo como ejercicio en clase?I: Claro, en vez de como yo os mandé cuatro redacciones de deberes, pues… En vez de mandaros revisiones de una misma redacción como deberes, hacer una revisión en clase de esta manera y, luego, lo que sean deberes, que sean redacciones nuevas.ARE1: En mi caso, yo siempre necesito mucho tiempo para hacerlo y también me distraigo mucho. Así que se me ocurrió otra cosa, o sea… Otra cosa relacionada con el tema, con el español, pero no ese error, sino otro. Así que no sé si lo podría hacer tan bien como quisiera en clase. Pero, al otro lado… No, por otro lado… Por otro lado… (Ríe.) Por otro lado, por ejemplo, si trabajáramos… ¿Trabajáramos? ¿Trabajaríamos? En pareja…I: Trabajáramos.ARE1: Trabajáramos en pareja, eso también podría ayudar.I: Es verdad, sí.ARE1: Para hacer más conexiones y… Sí.I: Es verdad.ARE1: No tengo una respuesta clara, perdón. (Ríe.)I: Hombre, por eso estoy haciendo el artículo, ARE1, yo tampoco. (Ríe.)ARE1: Después me lo leo. (Ríe.)I: Entonces… Vale, y ya, por último, ¿hay algún feedback que te hayan dado alguna vez… O sea, no el feedback completo de la redacción, sino algo en concreto que te hayan dicho alguna vez, en una redacción, que se haya quedado siempre contigo? Como algo que te acuerdes siempre cuando vas a escribir.ARE1: Bueno, eso, lo que dije antes de “de” y “en”. Y recuerdo el ejemplo que estuvimos trabajando… Perdón, traduciendo un artículo del alemán al español, y había algo como: “El…” No, ¿cómo era? “Un pueblo en”… “Un pueblo en España”, algo así, y era “un pueblo de España” o “los pueblos de España”.I: Sí. Ya, entiendo cuál es el error, sí.ARE1: Sí, pues eso.I: Sería… Esto también lo cometen los ingleses mucho… Es: “ve al parque en tu ciudad”, por ejemplo…ARE1: Sí.I: … En vez de “ve al parque de tu ciudad”.ARE1: Exacto, eso.I: Sí, sí, sí. ¿Y qué características crees que tenía este feedback para que haya sido tan memorable para ti?ARE1: Bueno, fue algo que siempre hacía, o que tendía a hacer.I: O sea, te pareció relevante.ARE1: Sí. Sí, porque es algo que te ocurre varias veces, y algo que… No sé, no es puntual.I: Vale.ARE1: Es más… Es más estrecho.I: Sí, entiendo. Vale, pues ahora sí que… A ver, aquí estás. Voy a parar la grabación… Aquí.
POST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH ICE1English translation (original transcript in Spanish below)I: It should be recording now. Okay, so… Before I start showing you everything I wanted to share, I’ll explain a bit why I need the interview. I’ve been working on an article to see which type of feedback given to students is most useful for improving their Spanish. Specifically, I’m focusing a lot on vocabulary. So, I’ve done an analysis of the essays, noting all the mistakes you made and then the feedback I gave you on those mistakes. And from these mistakes, I looked at which ones you improved, which ones you repeated, and which ones you tried to fix but didn’t fully correct. So, we’ll review this a bit, and I’ll ask for your opinions. I don’t expect you to remember, after all this time, why you did something one way and not another, but you can speculate, based on what you see, what happened or why the feedback wasn’t as clear, or if it was clear. What I can tell you, ICE1, is that I chose you because… Well, you also agreed, but… Besides that, I chose you because you incorporated many of the corrections I gave you. When we talk about different essays, it’s normal that not all the mistakes are corrected because, depending on the topic, you might use the same vocabulary or not. But in your case, in total, out of the four essays I reviewed, you made 46 mistakes and corrected 19 of them, which is almost half. So, for essays that aren’t versions of the same one, you’re one of the people who used the feedback I gave the most. So, I’m very happy that you agreed to do this. Now, to give you a bit of… To refresh your memory a bit, I’m going to share my screen. Let me know if it appears for you.ICE1: Yes.I: Okay, perfect. These are the types of feedback I asked you about. Wait, let me put it in full screen for you, so you can see just our video call. Can you see it well like this? Do you see just the questionnaire?ICE1: The questionnaire? Yes, I can see it.I: Perfect. So these are the responses you gave in the questionnaire. I’m just showing you this to remind you of the types of feedback we looked at. This type of feedback simply gives the correct answer instead of what the student wrote. You found this type of feedback clear but not very useful because it didn’t explain the errors.ICE1: (Nods.)I: Then there’s this other type of feedback, which is the same but offers an explanation of why it constitutes an error. You found this very clear and also very useful because it added this explanation. Then there was this type of feedback, which only indicated that an error had occurred but didn’t say where or what the error was. You didn’t find this clear or useful. If I’m going too fast, let me know, okay, ICE1? I know it’s a lot of information.ICE1: No, it’s fine.I: Okay. This other type of feedback only underlines where the error is but doesn’t indicate what the error is. You found this a bit clearer than the previous one but still not very useful. Then there was this version, which underlined the error and indicated what type of error it was: whether it was vocabulary, grammar, etc. But again, it didn’t specify what the error was. After that, we had this feedback version that underlined where the error was and asked a question to help the student think about the answer. You found this more useful and clearer than the previous one, but you also mentioned that it could cause confusion because sometimes the questions or the type of error were too complex to be resolved this way. And finally, we had this feedback format, where the teacher reformulates the entire student fragment to convey the same message but with the teacher’s words. You didn’t find this clear or useful. Okay. Would you say that you still hold more or less the same opinions about these types of feedback?ICE1: Yes, I would say so, but maybe I could have explained better why I think that way. Because, for example, when you have corrections without perfectly explaining what they are about, it can be a good activity for a high-level student to find the errors.I: Are you referring to the first type where I just give the solution without explaining why? Or the…ICE1: No.I: Or the one where I only indicate that there’s an error but don’t say what the error is?ICE1: Yes.I: OK. And do you think most students would invest the time to figure out what the error is?ICE1: No. (Laughs.)I: (Laughs.) So, weighing the options, what do you think would be better? Giving the answer or requiring the student to find the solution? For example, by asking them to submit the revised essay.ICE1: I would say it could be an activity in class where you have to find the errors, but at home or as homework, I think it’s better to have the explanation.I: (Nods.) Okay. So let’s do a summary of what happened in the essays. I’ll explain briefly. Wait, I’ve got this in the way. Okay. Here’s a summary. It’s for me, don’t worry, I know you’re not familiar with this table. Let’s see, the majority of the vocabulary errors you made were substitution errors, which means using a word that exists in Spanish but in a context or with a meaning different from what it actually has.ICE1: (Nods.)I: However, the errors you corrected the best were gender errors, which, well, in many cases, were probably just slips, something you actually know well. And creation errors, which are errors where a word is invented that doesn’t exist in Spanish.ICE1: (Nods.)I: But, okay, let’s first look at the substitution errors you corrected since those were the ones you made the most. So… Okay, using “dilemas” instead of “problemas” in Task 2. Let’s see: Task 2 was this one for you. Let me see if I can find… Because, since it’s scanned, I can’t directly search for the word.ICE1: Ah, yes. (Laughs.)I: If you see the word “dilemas,” let me know. Let’s see… Here it is. I underlined this word. Can you see it well, or should I make it bigger?ICE1: (Nods.) No, I can see it well.I: Okay. And I asked you: “Is this the best word to express what you want to say?” And then… Let me find it. This is the document mess I mentioned earlier, and I appreciate your patience.ICE1: (Nods and laughs.)I: Let’s see, in which essay did you correct it? Okay, in Task 4. No, not here. Here. In Task 3: “para combatir problemas tales como” (to combat problems such as). Let’s see…ICE1: It’s at the end.I: At the end? Ah, yes, here it is. Okay, perfect. So, my question here… Obviously, you might not remember exactly… But would you say that using “problemas” here at the end, instead of “dilemas” as you used earlier, has something to do with the feedback? Or is it just a coincidence?ICE1: Yes, I’d say it’s a coincidence because I don’t remember using the word “dilemas,” and it’s not a word I would use often. I think I was trying to find a substitute for “problemas” so as not to repeat it. Well, it didn’t work. (Laughs.)I: No, no, but what you mention, we’ll get to that later… It has to do with vocabulary diversity, and I find it interesting. I also wanted to ask you about that. And the other substitution error we had… Let’s see, this was “dilemas,” and the other one… Here, “demográfica” and “población”… “Demográfica” was in Task 3. Let’s see… “demográfica.” Here, where I simply crossed out “demográfica” and wrote “población” above it. The sentence would be: “no ha podido alcanzar el mismo nivel de crecimiento que ha alcanzado la demográfica” (hasn’t been able to reach the same level of growth that the demographic has), which should be “la población” (the population). And then here, I assume you used “población.” Here, yes: “Garantizó a la población su seguridad con la siguiente declaración” (guaranteed the population’s safety with the following statement). Do you think here you applied the feedback, or was it also a coincidence?ICE1: Yes, I think I invented the word to avoid saying “población” again, I think.I: OK.ICE1: I don’t remember well.I: But in general, it doesn’t seem like… “Población” isn’t a word you usually have trouble with.ICE1: No.I: Or have had trouble with in the past. Okay, that’s all regarding substitution errors. And out of the ones you improved the most, which are creation errors, there’s one in particular that you repeated on more than one occasion, which is forgetting the “r” at the end of “encontrar” (to find).ICE1: Oh, yes. It happens to me a lot. (Laughs.)I: Aha, okay. And why do you think this happens, forgetting the “r” at the end?ICE1: No idea, it happens to me in all the languages I speak. (Laughs.) Yes. I don’t think it’s something that… Well… I don’t know. (Laughs.)I: I thought it might be because if you were reading it in English, often the “r” isn’t pronounced at the end of a syllable in English. And maybe when reading… If you’re reading it mentally, where you don’t hear it, it could be that the reading system of your native language is being applied.ICE1: Maybe… But I do it in Portuguese too. And I think it doesn’t happen as much when I’m using the computer, I think. It’s when I’m writing by hand.I: That’s true. Yes, in both cases, it happened when you were writing by hand.ICE1: Yes.I: This was one… The other was the same type of error, there was another creation error. Ah, “estes.”ICE1: Ah, yes!I: It was in Task 2 as well. Why did you say “ah, yes”? Is it an error that happens to you more than once? Or is it an error you remembered?ICE1: Yes, I recall that mistake. I think about it every time I write “estos” now. I remember making that mistake. (Laughs.)I: In the course?ICE1: Yes.I: And why is that? That’s interesting!ICE1: It’s something that… It’s pretty simple, I think, but I just didn’t know. I thought “estes” was a word. (Laughs.)I: You mean “estes,” with an “e.”ICE1: Yes, “estes.”I: Hmm. I see. And do you think that if, instead of asking you a question, I had just changed the “e” to an “o,” you would still remember it today?ICE1: Maybe not, but yes.I: Because in your preferences, this type of correction wasn’t something you liked as much.ICE1: Yes.I: Do you think the error wasn’t that complex? Because I understand that if it’s a contextual error that requires a lot of thought, the question could be confusing. Is it more useful to ask it like this, to make you think, rather than just marking it?ICE1: In this case, I think it worked well because when I saw the error, I could figure out what had happened. But in other cases, where I have no idea how to fix the error, it’s not useful. Well, like… The teacher can’t know if it will be helpful for me or not.I: Of course, that’s true. Okay, that’s all for creation errors, and then we had… Okay, looking at the type of feedback that you mentioned in the questionnaire that you didn’t like as much, I checked to see in which cases it helped you. For example, this type of feedback, which is just underlining, was useful for gender issues. For example… Yes, I underlined “otras,” and then you correctly replaced it with “otros,” “nuestra,” and “nuestro.” Do you think that if the error is very simple for someone at an advanced level, like you all were at C1, it’s not worth doing a more sophisticated correction than this?ICE1: Yes, and I think… It’s not that I’m making mistakes, it’s that I’m not reading what I wrote. And… Well, that’s my problem, but… (Laughs.)I: But it doesn’t seem like that. In general, you’re someone who makes very few mistakes. It doesn’t give the impression that you write and never go back to reread what you’ve written, honestly. And then what caught my attention… Okay, yes, in the case of “dilemas,” which you said was a coincidence… We have here an error related to prepositions. And now I’ll show you this Excel… Which is “a través”… I’ll make it bigger because I realize it’s tiny.ICE1: Yes. (Laughs.)I: Let’s see… Here. You had written “que se puede ver a través del mundo entero” instead of “en el mundo entero” (which can be seen throughout the whole world), likely as a transfer from English. And then these are phrases where you applied the correction I gave you, which was “en el” (in the), and… I didn’t give you any explanation, I just crossed out “a través del” and wrote “en el” instead.ICE1: (Nods.)I: And we have… The ones in black are applied correctly, and the one in red is the form I indicated as correct…ICE1: (Nods.)I: But in this context, it doesn’t work. Which is: “la primera fatalidad vino en la forma de una” (the first fatality came in the form of a)… Wait, I can look it up directly in the essay. “La primera fatalidad vino en la forma de una joven bañadora” (the first fatality came in the form of a young swimmer). Would you say this “en la” has something to do with the use I changed from “a través del”? Or, in general… Prepositions depend a lot on the language, and they’re hard to learn because they don’t follow a clear logic; it’s more about what has become established in each language. When you’re writing and using something like “en el,” what’s your process for choosing which preposition to use?ICE1: (Nods and thinks.)I: I mean, has it happened to you more than once to write “a través del” instead of “en el” because of English, or do you not remember?ICE1: I don’t remember. I think it’s just that I don’t think much when I write, which is bad, but yes…I: Not necessarily.ICE1: Maybe I hadn’t thought about it.I: So, in general, you don’t feel like you have problems with prepositions.ICE1: Well, yes, but always… But yeah, I don’t remember much.I: And thinking about it in abstract terms, what kind of correction do you think would be best for these types of constructions, for prepositions like this?ICE1: Well, for me, a full explanation because in this case, I don’t understand why the preposition isn’t used.I: The… “a través del,” you mean?ICE1: No, here, in “en la forma.”I: The preposition is used. What wouldn’t be used is the article.ICE1: Ah, okay. The determiner.I: Exactly, the construction is “en forma de” (in the form of).ICE1: Ah, got it.I: Because if you said “la forma de” (the form of), we’d understand that there’s only one form, and we all know which one it is.ICE1: (Nods.)I: And then, regarding repeated mistakes, it’s just what we’ve already discussed about not adding the final “r” to some infinitives.ICE1: (Nods.)I: So, in terms of mistakes, ICE1, you can be very happy because you made very, very few. Now, these were specific errors I wanted to discuss with you, but now I want to connect them to what you explained in the questionnaire. You said that feedback is very important to you—you appreciate receiving it.ICE1: (Nods.)I: You’re generally satisfied with the feedback you’ve received from your various teachers, and you find it very useful. You also said that you usually reread the feedback before turning in your next assignments and that you often look for additional information on the errors you made. Would you say this has been true throughout your history as a language student?ICE1: Yes.I: How… I mean, why do you think you place so much importance on feedback?ICE1: Well, I don’t know, because it helps you improve your level in the language, and, well, if you’ve received feedback on an essay, I think it’s very important to reread it because you can make sure you don’t make the same mistakes again.I: And when you write the next essay, for example, are you trying to use structures or vocabulary that you got wrong before, to try to use them correctly this time, or…?ICE1: Eh… I’d say no.I: Okay, so what we’ve seen is just a coincidence.ICE1: (Nods.)I: And another point, related to something you mentioned earlier, is that aside from errors, I’ve also measured the complexity of the writing tasks and the progression you’ve followed. In your case, which isn’t typical for all the students I’ve analyzed, there’s a very clear progression from the first to the last essay, both in terms of the difficulty of the vocabulary you’ve used and the diversity of the vocabulary. So, you’ve been increasing the variety of vocabulary—the measures always increase—and also the level of the vocabulary. Is this something you’ve done consciously, or was it…?ICE1: No, by coincidence again. (Laughs.)I: (Laughs.) Because earlier, you said you were trying not to repeat the same words.ICE1: (Nods.)I: So, there is some intention to increase the diversity of the vocabulary you use.ICE1: Yes, that’s true. I hadn’t done it before, the idea of not repeating the same words—I hadn’t thought about it. And now that I’ve had to look in a thesaurus or something, I remember more words.I: But do you mean that you hadn’t done this before the course, or in general that you started…?ICE1: In general, yes.I: So, would you say this has something to do with the feedback you’ve received about looking for more words, or…?ICE1: Yes, I’d say so. Because I’d never received feedback like that before, maybe because the teachers I have in England don’t care as much about not repeating words.I: (Nods.) That’s what I was going to ask you now, which is: out of all the types of feedback we’ve seen, which ones would you say you’ve received most frequently? Since you started learning Spanish, or also Portuguese…ICE1: (Thinks.) Ah, I’m not sure.I: If you want, I can show them to you again.ICE1: Yes, please.I: Let’s see… (Shows them.) Which ones seem most familiar to you?ICE1: I think the gender ones, because they’re not complex, but it’s something I do a lot because… Well, I’m not really thinking. Of course, I know the difference between genders, but when it’s time to write or speak, I just forget how to say it, if you know what I mean.I: (Nods.) Yes, of course. And also, in English, words don’t have gender, so it’s something you’re learning from scratch, and it doesn’t always match in Portuguese either, so it can be confusing.ICE1: (Nods.)I: But I mean, what did the feedback that you received or that your teachers have given you look like? Out of all these types we’ve looked at here…ICE1: Ah, okay.I: Those which just indicate the solution, or just underline, or… this kind of thing. Which would you say are the ones you’re most familiar with, that you’ve experienced?ICE1: (Thinks.)I: I can show them again. We had this one, which just gives the correct solution.ICE1: Yes, I think just giving the solution. And sometimes they write a… What’s the word? A “parágrafo”? “Párrafo”? A paragraph? I’m not sure.I: Both words exist.ICE1: Oh, really? Like… explaining the types of errors you made but not explaining each one in detail.I: And this one, for example, which just indicates there’s an error?ICE1: I’ve never seen that.I: And just underlining?ICE1: No.I: Not that either, okay. And this type, which is pretty… It’s quite trendy now. Marking the type of error to give the student a small clue but leaving it up to the student to solve it.ICE1: I only saw this once in high school, in my Latin classes. But never from a modern language teacher.I: And how did you find it in Latin? Do you think it’s useful?ICE1: Well, I found it very difficult, honestly. And… I think it could have been useful if I had a better level of Latin. But when I was 15, I didn’t understand what “lexicon” or “grammar” meant or anything.I: And did the teacher explain it before giving you the feedback?ICE1: Yes, he explained it to us, but since we don’t learn anything like that in England, not even in English… And it was the first time I’d heard those kinds of terms… I found it really hard to understand.I: Very good. And this one with questions?ICE1: No, I’m not familiar with it.I: And this one with reformulations, no?ICE1: I think maybe reformulations, but after receiving another type of feedback first.I: And as a model presented before, no?ICE1: No.I: And… Okay, here was your ranking. And you also mentioned that it was important for you to receive overall feedback and positive comments. Do you think this affects how much you engage with teachers’ feedback afterward, or…?ICE1: I don’t think it matters, but I think it helps avoid, like… I don’t know what I’m trying to say. If you also receive positive feedback, you won’t feel like you can’t speak the language, and you’ll feel like you can improve. But if you only get negative feedback, for me, it would make me feel like I’m the worst student or something.I: And in general, have you been receiving positive feedback as well, or would you say it’s more common to only get…?ICE1: I think it’s more common to only get negative feedback, but I’ve also received positive feedback from one teacher.I: I ask because, as it shows in your essays, you have a positive attitude toward feedback, and you use it to improve. So, even if you’ve mostly received negative feedback, it hasn’t stopped you from engaging with it well.ICE1: Yes.I: So, when you say that it helps you, that it’s very important, and that it helps a lot, do you think this in general for everyone, but for you, it hasn’t been as…? Or do you feel it has made a difference?ICE1: Yes.I: Do you notice a difference, or are you saying this for everyone in general and not for yourself? (Laughs.)ICE1: (Laughs.) It’s just that there are things… For example, I might say that I don’t like a type of feedback, but it could be the type that helps me the most, and I don’t realize it.I: Sure, but sometimes there’s also a connection. If you like a certain type of feedback, you might pay more attention to it than if you don’t like it.ICE1: (Nods.) Or I think sometimes if I don’t like a type of feedback and I don’t like the mistakes I made, it might push me to work harder because I don’t want to receive that kind of feedback again.I: So, would you say that making a mistake for you is like… something you don’t like, something that’s a bit embarrassing?ICE1: Well… Not a hundred percent.I: Maybe not embarrassing…ICE1: Not a hundred percent, but… Well, sometimes, yes, because the truth is, I don’t want to make so many mistakes, but they’re things that help me improve, so they’re not all bad.I: Let me see, I think I’ve asked everything I wanted to ask. Let’s see… Would you say, for example, that when you see a…? In the case of… You mentioned that you hadn’t had feedback in the form of questions before, and we saw the example of “estes,” where I corrected it with a question, and you remembered it. Do you think it might be that you remember it, not so much because the type of feedback was useful, but because it was something you didn’t know before, so it caught your attention?ICE1: Yes, I think it didn’t have anything to do with the type of feedback, but because it was feedback that was quite shocking to me… Yes.I: That’s why you remember it. And, to wrap up, what would you say is the process you follow when you’re given an essay as homework? What does your writing process look like? (Laughs.)ICE1: (Laughs and thinks.)I: Do you sit down in front of the computer…?ICE1: It’s really hard for me to do work like… Writing an outline or something, but I know it’s the best thing to do. So, sometimes I just start writing the introduction, and then I think about what I’m going to talk about. But it’s not the best way to do it, but it’s what I do.I: No, that’s fine, that’s fine. I’m interested in what you do. I’m not judging it. In fact, I have to write this article because it’s not clear what’s right and what’s wrong, so… And it also depends on the student. So, would you say you sit down and start writing as it comes to you and then maybe do a review at the end?ICE1: (Nods.)I: Okay. And is there any memorable feedback you’ve received in your life that has always stayed with you?ICE1: Yes, I think it’s the simplest, least complex things. For example, I always remember the word “iglesia” (church) because I had to write something in an exam about churches, and I didn’t know the word, so I could only write “catedral” (cathedral), and now I’ll never forget it.I: Okay, well, I’d say you’ve answered all the questions I wanted to ask.
POST-INTERVENTION DEBRIEFING WITH ICE1Original transcript in SpanishI: Se supone que ahora está grabando. Vale, pues… Antes de empezar a mostrarte todo lo que te quería enseñar, te explico un poco por qué necesito la entrevista. Yo estaba trabajando en un artículo para ver qué tipo de feedback del que se da a los estudiantes es más útil para mejorar el español. Y, en concreto, me centro mucho en el vocabulario. Entonces, he hecho un análisis de las redacciones, anotando todos los errores que cometisteis y luego el feedback que yo os di sobre esos errores. Y, de estos errores, cuáles habéis mejorado, cuáles habéis repetido y cuáles habéis intentado arreglar, pero no estaban del todo bien arreglados. Entonces, haremos un poco de repaso sobre esto y te preguntaré tus opiniones. No espero que recuerdes, después de tanto tiempo, por qué hiciste algo así y no de la otra manera, pero puedes suponer, a partir de lo que te parezca cuando lo veas, qué pasó o por qué el feedback no era tan claro, o sí que era claro. Lo que sí que te digo, ICE1, es que te he elegido porque… O sea, además, me has dicho que sí, pero… Aparte, te he elegido porque tú incorporaste muchísimas de las correcciones que te hice. Cuando hablamos de redacciones diferentes, es normal que no aparezcan arreglados todos los errores, porque también, dependiendo de qué tema estés hablando, vas a usar el mismo vocabulario o no. Pero, en tu caso, en total, de las cuatro redacciones que he mirado, cometiste 46 errores y arreglaste, de estos 46, 19, que es casi la mitad. O sea, que, para ser redacciones que no son versiones de una misma redacción, eres de las personas que más utilizó el feedback que había dado. Así que estoy muy feliz de que seas tú quien haya dicho que sí. Entonces, a ver, para darte un poco de… Para refrescarte un poco la memoria, voy a compartir la pantalla. Dime si te aparece.ICE1: Sí.I: Vale, perfecto. Estos son los tipos de feedback sobre los que os preguntaba. Espera, te pongo mejor la pantalla completa, ¿no? Porque puedes ver nuestra videollamada. ¿Así ves bien? ¿Ves solo el cuestionario?ICE1: ¿El cuestionario? Sí, lo veo.I: Perfecto. Vale, pues estas son las respuestas que tú diste al cuestionario. Y solo te muestro esto para recordarte los tipos de feedback que habíamos mirado. Este tipo de feedback simplemente da la respuesta que sería en lugar de lo que ha puesto el estudiante. Y a ti te pareció que este tipo de feedback era claro, pero que no era muy útil, porque no se explicaban los errores.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Después, este otro tipo de feedback, que es lo mismo, pero ofrece una explicación de por qué eso constituye un error. Y te pareció muy claro y además muy útil por añadir esta explicación. Luego había este tipo de feedback, que lo único que hacía era indicar que se había producido un error, pero no decía ni dónde ni cuál era el error. Y este ni te pareció claro, ni te pareció útil. Si voy muy rápido, avísame, ¿eh, ICE1? Que sé que es mucha información.ICE1: No, está bien.I: Vale. Este otro tipo de feedback lo único que hace es subrayar en qué… O sea, dónde está el error, pero no indica en qué consiste el error. Y te pareció algo más claro que el anterior, pero tampoco demasiado útil. Luego había esta versión, que subrayaba el error e indicaba de qué tipo de error se trataba: si era de vocabulario, si era de gramática… Pero, nuevamente, no se indicaba en qué consistía el error. Después, teníamos esta versión del feedback que subrayaba dónde estaba el error y hacía alguna pregunta que ayudaba al estudiante a pensar en la respuesta. Entonces, te parecía más útil y más clara que el anterior, pero también dijiste aquí que podía ocasionar confusión, porque a veces las preguntas no… O el tipo de error era demasiado complejo para que se pudiera resolver de esta manera. Y, ya por último, teníamos este formato de corrección, que consiste en que el profesor reformule todo el fragmento del estudiante, de manera que se transmita el mismo mensaje, pero con las palabras del profesor. Y no te pareció nada claro, ni nada útil. Vale. De estos tipos de feedback, ¿dirías que todavía conservas más o menos las mismas opiniones?ICE1: Sí, yo diría que sí, pero quizás podría haber explicado mejor por qué pienso así. Porque, por ejemplo, cuando tienes las correcciones y no explicas perfectamente de qué se trata, puede ser como una actividad buena para un estudiante de un alto nivel para encontrar los errores.I: ¿Te refieres al primer tipo en el que solo doy la solución sin explicar el porqué? ¿O al…?ICE1: No.I: ¿O donde solo indico que hay un error, pero no digo cuál es el error?ICE1: Sí.I: Vale. ¿Y tú crees que la mayoría de estudiantes invertirían el tiempo en buscar de qué se trata el error?ICE1: No. (Ríe.)I: (Ríe.) Entonces, en una balanza, ¿qué crees que sería mejor? ¿Dar la respuesta u obligar al estudiante a buscar la solución? Por ejemplo, pidiéndole que entregase la redacción arreglada.ICE1: Yo diría que puede ser, como… Podría ser una actividad en clase, donde tienes que encontrar los errores, pero, en casa o de deberes, creo que es mejor tener la explicación.I: (Asiente.) Vale. Entonces, vamos a hacer un resumen de lo que ha pasado en las redacciones. Te explico un poco por encima, a ver. Espera, que tengo esto en medio. Vale. Aquí hay un resumen. Es para mí, ¿eh? No te preocupes que sé que no conoces bien esta tabla. A ver, tú la mayoría de errores que habías cometido a nivel de vocabulario eran de sustitución, que consiste en utilizar una palabra que existe en el español, pero en un contexto o con un significado distinto del que tiene realmente. ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Sin embargo, los errores que mejor corregiste fueron de género, que, bueno, esos seguro que en muchos casos se habían producido simplemente por un lapsus, y que eran algo que en verdad conocías bien. Y los de creación, que los de creación son la invención de una palabra que no existe en español.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Pero, bien, vamos a ver primero los que arreglaste de sustitución, ya que eran los que habías cometido más. Que son… Vale, utilizar “dilemas” por “problemas” en la redacción 2. Vamos a ver: la redacción 2 era esta para ti. A ver ahora si encuentro… Porque, al estar escaneada, no puedo buscar directamente la palabra.ICE1: Ah, sí. (Ríe.)I: Si tú ves la palabra “dilemas”, avísame. A ver… Aquí, aquí está. Te subrayé esta palabra. ¿Lo ves bien o te lo pongo más grande?ICE1: (Asiente.) No, lo veo bien.I: Vale. Y te pregunté: “¿Es esta la mejor palabra para expresar lo que quieres decir?” Y, entonces, después… Déjame localizar. Este es el lío de documentos que te explicaba antes y con el que te pido paciencia.ICE1: (Asiente y ríe.)I: A ver, ¿en qué redacción lo arreglaste? Vale, en la 4. No, no es aquí. Aquí. En la 3: “para combatir problemas tales como”. A ver…ICE1: Está en el final.I: ¿En el final? Ah, vale, sí, aquí está. Vale, perfecto. Entonces, mi pregunta aquí… Obviamente, es posible que no te acuerdes bien… Pero ¿tú dirías que el hecho de utilizar “problemas” aquí, al final, en lugar de “dilemas”, como habías utilizado aquí, tiene algo que ver con el feedback? ¿O es simplemente casualidad?ICE1: Sí, diría que es casualidad, porque no recuerdo haber usado la palabra “dilemas”, y no es una palabra que usaría mucho. Creo que estaba intentando encontrar una sustitución de palabra para no repetir “problemas”. Bueno, no funcionó. (Ríe.)I: No, no, pero esto que mencionas, iremos a ello después… Que tiene que ver con la diversidad del vocabulario y me parece interesante. Te quería preguntar también sobre eso. Y el otro error de sustitución que teníamos… A ver, este era el de “dilemas” y el otro… Aquí, “demográfica” y “población”… Que “demográfica” estaba en la redacción 3. A ver… “demográfica”. Aquí, que simplemente te taché “demográfica” y te puse “población” encima. La frase sería: “no ha podido alcanzar el mismo nivel de crecimiento que ha alcanzado la demográfica”, que sería “la población”. Y luego, aquí, intuyo que has usado “población”. Aquí, sí: “Garantizó a la población su seguridad con la siguiente declaración”. ¿Crees que aquí sí que aplicaste feedback o que era también casualidad?ICE1: Sí, creo que inventé la palabra para no decir “población” otra vez, creo.I: Vale.ICE1: No recuerdo bien.I: Pero, en general, no te suena que sea una... O sea, “población” no es una palabra que acostumbres a tener problemas con ella.ICE1: No.I: O que hayas tenido en el pasado. Vale, esto en cuanto a los errores de sustitución. Y los que has mejorado más, que son los de creación, tenemos uno en concreto que has repetido en más de una ocasión, que es “encontrar”... O sea, en vez de poner “encontrar”, olvidar la “r” al final.ICE1: Oh, sí. Me pasa mucho. (Ríe.)I: Ajá, vale. ¿Y por qué crees que te ocurre esto de olvidar la “r” al final?ICE1: Ni idea, es que me pasa en todas las lenguas que hablo. (Ríe.) Sí. No creo que sería algo que... Pues... No lo sé. Es que... No sé. (Ríe.)I: Yo he pensado que puede ser porque, si lo leyeras en inglés, muchas veces no se pronuncia la “r” al final de sílaba en inglés. Y, a lo mejor, al leer... O sea, si lo estás leyendo mentalmente, que no lo escuchas, puede ser que se aplique el sistema de lectura de tu lengua materna.ICE1: Quizás… Pero es que lo hago en portugués también. Y creo que solo... No me ocurre, creo... Bueno, no me ocurre tanto quizás cuando estoy usando el ordenador, creo. Es cuando estoy escribiendo a mano.I: Es verdad. Sí, en los dos casos te ha pasado escribiendo a mano.ICE1: Sí.I: Este era uno… El otro era el mismo tipo de error, había otro de creación. Ah, “estes”.ICE1: ¡Ah, sí!I: Estaba en la redacción 2 también. ¿Por qué has dicho “ah, sí”? ¿Es un error que te pasa más de una vez? ¿O es un error que recordabas?ICE1: Sí, recuerdo haber cometido el error. Y también es que, cada vez que voy a escribir “estos”, hoy en día, me recuerdo de haber cometido el error. (Ríe.)I: ¿En la asignatura?ICE1: Sí.I: ¿Y por qué esto? ¡Es interesante!ICE1: Es algo que... Como que… Es algo bastante simple, creo, pero es que no lo sabía. O sea, creía que “estos” era una palabra. (Ríe.)I: O sea, “estes”, con “e”.ICE1: “Estes”, sí.I: Mmm. Entiendo. ¿Y crees que si, en vez de haberte puesto la pregunta, hubiese cambiado la “e” por una “o”, te acordarías hoy en día?ICE1: Quizás no, pero sí.I: Es decir… Porque en tus preferencias este tipo de corrección no te gustaba tanto.ICE1: Sí.I: ¿Crees que el error no es tan complejo? Porque entiendo que, si es un error contextual que uno tiene que pensar mucho, la pregunta puede ser confusa. ¿Es más útil preguntarlo así, que te hace pensar, que solo marcarlo?ICE1: En este caso, creo que funcionó bien, porque, cuando vi el error, podía averiguar qué me había pasado. Pero, en otros casos, en los que no tengo ni idea de cómo cambiar el error, no es útil. Bueno, como… La profesora no puede saber si va a ser útil para mí o no.I: Claro, esto es así. Vale, esto en cuanto a los de creación, y, luego, teníamos... Vale, fijándome en el tipo de feedback que tú en el cuestionario indicaste que no te gustaba tanto, he mirado, o sea, en qué casos te ha sido de ayuda y, por ejemplo, este tipo de feedback, que es solo subrayar, te ha sido útil en cuestiones de género, por ejemplo… Sí, te subrayé un “otras” y luego lo sustituiste bien por “otros”. “Nuestra” y “nuestro”. ¿Crees que si el error es muy simple para una persona de nivel muy avanzado, como sois vosotros, que estabais ya en un C1, no vale la pena hacer una corrección más sofisticada que esta?ICE1: Sí, y creo que… No es como que estoy cometiendo errores, es que no estoy leyendo lo que escribo y… Pues es un problema mío, pero… (Ríe.)I: Pero no da esta impresión cuando… O sea, en general, eres una persona que comete pocos errores. No da la impresión de que escribas y no vuelvas a leer nunca más lo que has escrito, la verdad. Y, luego, me había llamado la atención… Vale, sí, en el caso este de “dilemas”, que fue casualidad, me dijiste… Tenemos aquí un error de régimen, que tiene que ver con las preposiciones. Y ahora te voy a poner este Excel… Que es “a través”… Te lo voy a poner grande, porque ahora entiendo que está diminuto.ICE1: Sí. (Ríe.)I: A ver… Aquí. Habías escrito “que se puede ver a través del mundo entero”, en vez de “en el mundo entero” por una transferencia del inglés. Y, entonces, estas son frases donde has aplicado la corrección que yo te di, que es “en el”, que era… No te di ninguna explicación, solo te taché “a través del” y te escribí “en el”.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Y teníamos… Los que están en negro están bien aplicados y el que está en rojo es la forma que yo te indiqué como correcta…ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Pero en este contexto no funciona. Que es: “la primera fatalidad vino en la forma de una”… Espera, lo puedo buscar directamente en la redacción. “La primera fatalidad vino en la forma de una joven bañadora”. ¿Dirías que tiene algo que ver este “en la” con el uso que te había cambiado de “a través del”? ¿O, en general…? O sea, el tema de las preposiciones es muy, muy… O sea, depende mucho del idioma y es difícil de aprender, porque no sigue una lógica muy clara, es más bien lo que se ha consolidado en cada idioma. Cuando tú vas escribiendo y utilizas esto, “en el”, ¿cuál es tu proceso a la hora de escoger qué preposición vas a poner?ICE1: (Asiente y piensa.)I: Quiero decir, ¿te ha pasado más veces de poner “a través del” en lugar de “en el” por el inglés, o no recuerdas?ICE1: No recuerdo, creo que es que no pienso mucho cuando escribo y es algo malo, pero sí…I: No, no necesariamente.ICE1: Quizás no lo había pensado.I: O sea, en general, no percibes que tengas problemas con las preposiciones.ICE1: Pues sí, pero siempre… Pero sí, no lo sé, no lo acuerdo mucho.I: Y, pensándolo en abstracto, ¿qué tipo de corrección crees que sería la mejor para este tipo de construcciones, preposiciones así?ICE1: Pues, para mí, una explicación entera, porque es que en este caso no entiendo por qué no se usa la preposición.I: ¿El… “a través del”, quieres decir?ICE1: No, aquí, en “en la forma”.I: La preposición sí se usa, lo que no se utilizaría es el artículo.ICE1: Ah, vale. El determinante.I: Exacto: la construcción es “en forma de”.ICE1: Ah, vale.I: Porque, si dijeras “la forma de”, entenderíamos que solo hay una forma y que todos sabemos cuál es.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Y luego, en cuanto a errores repetidos, era solo lo que ya hemos comentado de no poner la “r” final en algunos infinitivos.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Por lo tanto, en cuestión de errores, ICE1, puedes estar muy contenta, porque has cometido muy, muy pocos. Entonces, te… Ahora, estos eran errores concretos que quería comentar contigo, pero ahora quiero relacionarlo con lo que has explicado de… Bueno, lo que explicaste en el cuestionario, de que para ti el feedback es muy importante, dijiste… O sea, aprecias mucho recibirlo.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Estás en general satisfecha con el feedback que has ido recibiendo de tus distintos profesores y te parece muy útil. Y también dijiste que sueles releerlo siempre antes de entregar la siguiente redacción y que sueles buscar información adicional. ¿Esto dirías que es así para toda tu historia como estudiante de idiomas?ICE1: Sí.I: ¿Cómo…? O sea, ¿por qué crees que le das tanta importancia al feedback?ICE1: Pues, no lo sé, porque como… Te ayuda a mejorar su nivel en la lengua y, bueno, si has tenido feedback en una redacción, creo que es muy importante releerlo porque puedes asegurarte de no cometer los mismos errores.I: ¿Y, cuando escribes la siguiente redacción, por ejemplo, estás intentando usar estructuras o vocabulario que anteriormente has fallado para intentar usarlo bien en esta ocasión o…?ICE1: Eh… Diría que no.I: Vale, o sea, lo que encontramos entonces es casualidad.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Y otra cuestión, que tiene que ver con algo que habías comentado antes, es que también he medido, aparte de los errores, la complejidad de las redacciones y la evolución que has ido siguiendo. Y, en tu caso, que no es lo habitual de todos los estudiantes que he analizado, hay realmente una progresión muy clara de la primera a la última redacción, tanto con la dificultad del vocabulario que has utilizado, como con la diversidad del vocabulario. O sea, has ido incrementando la variedad de vocabulario, las medidas aumentan siempre, y también el nivel del vocabulario. Entonces, ¿esto es algo que has hecho de manera consciente, o ibas…?ICE1: No, por casualidad, otra vez. (Ríe.)I: (Ríe.) Porque antes has dicho que intentabas no repetir las mismas palabras.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Entonces, sí que hay cierta intención de aumentar la diversidad de vocabulario que usas.ICE1: Sí, es verdad. Es que no lo había hecho antes, lo de no tener que repetir las mismas palabras, no lo había pensado. Y ahora que he tenido que buscar en un tesauro o algo, es que… Pues, me recuerdo más palabras.I: ¿Pero te refieres a que no lo habías hecho antes de la asignatura o en general a que empezaste...?ICE1: En general, sí.I: ¿Pero entonces dirías que esto tiene que ver con el feedback que has recibido de buscar más palabras o…?ICE1: Sí, diría que sí. Porque nunca había recibido un feedback así, porque quizás a los profesores que tengo en Inglaterra no les importa no repetir la palabra.I: (Asiente.) Esto es lo que venía a preguntarte ahora, que es: de todos los tipos de feedback que hemos ido viendo, ¿cuáles dirías que son los que has obtenido con mayor frecuencia? Desde que empezaste con el español o también con el portugués…ICE1: (Piensa.) Ah, no sé.I: Si quieres, te los muestro de nuevo.ICE1: Sí, por fa.I: A ver… (Los muestra.) ¿Cuáles te resultan más familiares?ICE1: Creo que los de género, porque no son complejos, pero es algo que hago mucho, porque… Bueno, no estoy pensando. Es que claro que sé la diferencia entre los géneros, pero, cuando me toca escribir o hablar, es que no recuerdo cómo hablar, si me entiendes.I: (Asiente.) Sí, claro. Y aparte que, en inglés, las palabras no tienen género, así que es algo que aprendes desde cero y que además no siempre coincide en portugués, así que tienes una mezcla.ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Pero me refiero a qué aspecto tenía el feedback que te daban o que te hemos ido dando todos tus profesores. O sea que, de todos estos tipos que hemos visto aquí…ICE1: Ah, vale.I: Que solo indican solución, o solo subrayar, o… Este tipo… ¿Cuáles dirías que son los que te son más familiares, que has vivido?ICE1: (Piensa.)I: Te puedo ir mostrando. Teníamos este, que era indicar directamente la solución.ICE1: Sí, creo que solo indicar la solución. Y, a veces, escriben como… ¿Un parágrafo? ¿Un párrafo? No sé.I: Los dos existen.ICE1: ¿Ah, sí? Como… explicando el tipo de errores que cometiste, pero no explicando cada error.I: ¿Y este, por ejemplo, que es solo…?ICE1: Nunca lo había visto.I: ¿Y solo subrayar?ICE1: No.I: Tampoco, bien. ¿Y este tipo, que es bastante…? Está de moda ahora. Poner el tipo de error para dar una pequeña pista al estudiante, pero que sea el estudiante quien lo soluciona.ICE1: Este tipo solo lo había visto una vez en el instituto, en mis clases de latín. Pero nunca de un profesor de lenguas modernas.I: ¿Y el de latín qué te pareció? ¿Crees que es útil?ICE1: Pues yo lo encontré muy difícil, la verdad, y… Creo que podría haber sido útil si tenía un mejor nivel de latín. Pero es que no entendía… Cuando tenía como 15 años, no entendía qué significaba “léxico” o “gramática” ni nada.I: ¿Y el profesor o la profesora no explicó antes de daros el feedback?ICE1: Sí, nos lo explicó, pero como no aprendemos nada así en Inglaterra ni con el inglés… Y era la primera vez que había oído este tipo de palabras… Así lo encontré muy difícil de entender.I: Muy bien. ¿Y este así con formato de preguntas?ICE1: No, no lo conozco.I: ¿Y este de reformular, tampoco?ICE1: Creo que quizás reformular, pero después de haber recibido otro tipo de feedback.I: ¿Y presentado antes, como un modelo, tampoco?ICE1: No.I: Y… Vale, aquí estaba tu ranking. Y, luego, comentabas que para ti era importante recibir una valoración global y también comentarios positivos. ¿Crees que esto afecta de alguna manera las ganas con las que después usas el feedback de los profesores o…?ICE1: Creo que no importa, pero creo que evita, como… No sé qué quiero decir. Es que si también recibes feedback positivo, no vas a sentir que no puedes hablar la lengua y que sí que puedes mejorar. Pero, si solo recibes feedback negativo, para mí me haría sentir que soy la peor estudiante o algo.I: ¿Y, en general, has ido recibiendo también los positivos o dirías que es más frecuente recibir solo…?ICE1: Creo que es más frecuente recibir solo el feedback negativo, pero también he recibido positivo. Uno de todos los profesores.I: Lo digo porque, claro, y se nota en las redacciones también, tienes una concepción positiva del feedback y lo usas para mejorar. Entonces, incluso si normalmente has recibido solo feedback negativo, tampoco te ha impedido relacionarte bien con este feedback.ICE1: Sí.I: Entonces, cuando opinas que te ayuda, que es muy importante y que te ayuda mucho, ¿lo piensas en general para la población, pero para ti tampoco ha sido tan…? ¿O sí que notas que ha marcado diferencia?ICE1: Sí.I: ¿Sí notas diferencia o sí lo dices para la población en general y no para ti? (Ríe.)ICE1: (Ríe.) Es que hay cosas que… Por ejemplo, puedo decir que no me gusta un tipo de feedback, pero puede ser el tipo que más me ayuda y no lo sé.I: Claro, pero a veces también hay relación. Si a ti te gusta un tipo de feedback, le puedes prestar más atención que si no te gusta.ICE1: (Asiente.) O creo que a veces si no me gusta un tipo de feedback y no me gustan los errores que he cometido, quizás me va a empujar a trabajar más, porque no quiero recibir ese tipo de feedback otra vez.I: Entonces, ¿dirías que para ti cometer un error es como… algo que no te gusta, algo que es como un motivo de vergüenza?ICE1: Bueno… No cien por cien.I: O sea, quizá no vergüenza…ICE1: No cien por cien, pero… Pues, a veces sí, porque la verdad es que no quiero cometer tantos errores, pero son cosas que me ayudan a mejorar, así no son todos malos.I: A ver, creo que he preguntado todas las cosas que quería preguntar. A ver… ¿Y dirías, por ejemplo, que cuando ves un…? En el caso de… Me has comentado que antes no habías tenido feedback en forma de preguntas, y hemos visto el ejemplo de “estes”, que te lo corregí con una pregunta, y luego te acuerdas. ¿Crees que puede ser que te acuerdes, no tanto porque el tipo de feedback sea útil, sino porque, al ser algo que no conocías de antes, te llamó la atención?ICE1: Sí, creo que no tenía nada que ver con el tipo de feedback, pero, como era un feedback bastante chocante para mí… Y sí.I: Por eso recuerdas. Y, entonces, ya para terminar, ¿cuál dirías que es el proceso que sigues cuando te ponen una redacción de deberes y tienes que hacerla? ¿Cómo…? ¿Qué aspecto tiene el proceso que sigues? (Ríe.)ICE1: (Ríe y piensa.)I: O sea, ¿te sientas delante del ordenador…?ICE1: Es que me cuesta mucho hacer un trabajo como… Con escribir un plan o algo, pero sé que es la mejor cosa que hacer. Así, a veces empiezo a escribir como… la introducción, y después pienso de qué voy a hablar. Pero no es la mejor manera de hacerlo, pero es lo que hago yo.I: No, está bien, está bien. A mí me interesa lo que haces tú. No entro a valorarlo. De hecho, es que precisamente tengo que hacer este artículo porque no está claro lo que está bien y lo que está mal, así que… Y también depende del estudiante. Entonces, ¿dirías que te sientas y empiezas a escribir como te nace y luego quizás haces revisión al final?ICE1: (Asiente.)I: Vale. ¿Y hay algo memorable de algún feedback que te hayan dado en la vida que siempre te hayas llevado contigo?ICE1: Sí, creo que son las cosas más simples, menos complejas. Por ejemplo, siempre recuerdo la palabra “iglesia”, porque tenía que escribir algo en un examen sobre las iglesias, y no sabía la palabra y solo podía escribir “catedral”, y ahora no lo voy a olvidar.I: Vale, pues yo diría que ya me has dado respuesta a todas las cuestiones que te quería preguntar.